One of the primary threats to the goal of controlling and eventually defeating SARS-CoV-2 is that of mutation. Recognizing this, a great amount of effort and dedicated study is being given to the matter. Due to the novel coronavirus’s general prevalence and rate of mutation, this is an extremely dynamic area with constant new developments. Therefore, understanding the virus’s pathogenesis and how mutations affect it is crucial. This review attempts to aid in understanding the currently most important strains and what primary changes they entail in connection to more specific mutations, and how they each affect infectivity, antigen resistance, and other properties. In an attempt to maintain relevance to the time at which this paper will be published, priority has been given to variants classified by the WHO and the CDC as of Sep. 23, 2021, as “Variants of Concern”. Of particular interest in B.1.1.7, B.1.351, B.1.617.2, P.1 are the mutations affecting the Spike protein and Receptor Binding Domain, as they directly affect infectivity and susceptibility to neutralization. Certain mutations (D614G, E484K, N501Y, K417N, L452R and P681R) have appeared across several different strains, often accompanied by others that may be complementary working together to confer increased infectivity, fitness, or resistance to neutralization. We anticipate that the understanding of such COVID-19 mutations will, in the near future, prove important for diagnosis, treatment development, and vaccine development..

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations..

Special thanks to Dr. Jihee Park, who produced Fig. 1..

Conceptualization, writing-original draft preparation G.P., writing-review and editing, B.H. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript..

Conflicts of Interests The authors declare no conflict of interest..

Informed Consent Neither ethical approval nor informed consent was required for this study..

