.

COVID-19 pandemic
caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus type 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has become the world’s largest
public health emergency of the past few decades. Thousands of mutations
were identified in the SARS-CoV-2 genome. Some mutants are more infectious
and may replace the original strains. Recently, B.1.1.7(Alpha), B1.351(Beta),
and B.1.617.2(Delta) strains, which appear to have increased transmissibility,
were detected. These strains accounting for the high proportion of
newly diagnosed cases spread rapidly over the world. Particularly,
the Delta variant has been reported to account for a vast majority
of the infections in several countries over the last few weeks. The
application of biosensors in the detection of SARS-CoV-2 is important
for the control of the COVID-19 pandemic. Due to high demand for SARS-CoV-2
genotyping, it is urgent to develop reliable and efficient systems
based on integrated multiple biosensor technology for rapid detection
of multiple SARS-CoV-2 mutations simultaneously. This is important
not only for the detection and analysis of the current but also for
future mutations. Novel biosensors combined with other technologies
can be used for the reliable and effective detection of SARS-CoV-2
mutants..

Mutations are common and play
an important role in the life cycle
of viruses. For example, the A82V mutation in the
glycoprotein of Ebola virus increases its infectivity.1 A tyrosine-to-alanine mutation at residue 76 (Y76A) in the cytoplasmic tail region of M2 protein of influenza A is
essential for the virus production.2.

The worldwide spread and replication of SARS-CoV-2 provides a good
opportunity for its mutation. Generally, the presence of RNA proofreading
enzyme (NSP14)3 in the genome of SARS-CoV-2
leads to fewer gene mutations in SARS-CoV-2 than in other RNA viruses.
However, sequencing of several thousand SARS-CoV-2 genomes revealed
a number of repeated mutations, including synonymous and nonsynonymous
(Figure 1A). Globally,
NSP1/NSP2/NSP3/NSP11 are the most frequently mutated nonstructural
genes and ORF7a/ORF3a/S are the most frequently mutated structural
genes.4 Most mutations in SARS-CoV-2 genome
are silent and do not cause structural changes in encoded proteins.
However, changes in SARS-CoV-2 surface proteins usually have more
significant impact. SARS-CoV-2 genome encodes four structural proteins:
Spike (S) protein, Envelope (E) protein, Membrane (M) protein, and
nucleocapsid (N) protein. S protein is composed of S1 and S2 subunits
responsible for binding to the receptor and for fusion with the cell
membrane (Figure 1A).5 SARS-CoV-2 enters host cells and replicates by
fusing its spike glycoprotein with ACE2 on the surface of host cells.6 Most SARS-CoV-2 vaccines and antibodies target
S protein. Because SARS-CoV-2 S protein is important for recognizing
the host cell surface receptor and mediating cell fusion, investigation
of S protein mutations is of the utmost importance. The increasing
frequency of spike amino acid variants in many geographic regions
was identified by monitoring GISAID data.7 According to WHO new rule on the name of variants, various strains
can be recorded as B.1.1.7(Alpha), B1.351(Beta), P.1(Gamma), B.1.617.2(Delta),
B.1.617.1(Kappa), P.2(Zeta), etc.8.

Mutations in
SARS-CoV-2 and the methods of detecting SARS-CoV-2.
(A) Structure of SARS-CoV-2 and the most common mutations (D614G, N501Y, P618H, HV69-70del, Y144del, and N439K) occurring in the process of transmission. (B) Methods for the SARS-CoV-2
detection include those based on ELISA, nucleic acid amplification,
lateral flow immunoassays, and biosensors (figure was created in part
with BioRender)..

SARS-CoV-2 D614G mutant has attracted global attention. In the
past year, this mutant has replaced the original SARS-CoV-2 and has
become dominant in the pandemic. D614G is a missense
mutation caused by A-G nucleotide mutation at position 23403 and the
resulting amino acid change from aspartic acid (D) to glycine (G)
at the position 614 of the S protein.9D614G mutation may lead to destabilization of the interaction
between S1 and S2 domains.10D614G mutation does not enhance the affinity between ACE2 and S protein
but increases the amount of fully functional S protein on the virus
surface. This in turn increases its chance to bind to host cells and
improves the infection efficiency.11 SG614 is more stable than SD614, thus increasing
the transmission efficiency of the SG614 mutant. Pseudovirus
detection showed that ACE2 was the receptor of both D614 and G614, but there was a functional difference.12D614G mutation enhanced the
cleavage of S protein by protease and significantly promoted the entry
of the virus into ACE2 expressing cells. The conformation of the D614G mutant makes the virus membrane more likely to fuse
with the target cell membrane. This can change the binding characteristics
of ACE2 through the allosteric effect, improve the flexibility of
receptor-binding domain (RBD), and make the structure of the S protein
more open and easier to bind with ACE2. D614G mutants
showed increased viral load and transmission ability due to their
higher replication capacity.13 The higher
titer of pseudovirus in vitro and the higher level
of virus RNA in G614 infected samples showed that G614 was more infectious.14 However,
the D614G mutation did not show more resistance to
neutralizing antibodies.15 Furthermore,
no clinical differences in the severity of symptoms were identified
and the D614G mutation did not seem to affect the
effectiveness of the vaccines targeting S protein.10.

Notably, the latest experimental results discussed
below suggest
that SARS-CoV-2 infectivity is mainly determined by RBD mutations.
The main SARS-CoV-2 variations circulating in the population, such
as Alpha, Beta, Gamma, Delta, and others are also listed by their
RBD mutations. At this time, there is no definitive support for the
roles of the variations at other places, such as D614G, for SARS-CoV-2
infectivity..

Recently, a more transmissible strain, B.1.1.7(Alpha) (VUI-202012/01),
has emerged, which has been spreading rapidly. B.1.1.7(Alpha) mutation
caused a large number of infections in London and Kent in early December.16,17 In addition, B.1.1.7(Alpha) has been found in many other countries
and regions..

A number of variations have been identified in
the new strain of
B.1.1.7(Alpha), including 6 synonymous mutations (nonamino acid substitution),
3 frame deletions, and 14 nonsynonymous mutations (amino acid substitution).
Five of the six synonymous mutations were in ORF1ab (C913T, C5986T,
C14676T, C15279T, C16176T) and one in the M gene (T26801C).18 Among these 17 mutations, multiple mutations
were discovered in the spike gene (deletion 69-70, deletion
144, N501Y, A570D, D614G, P681H, T716I, S982A, D1118H).18 Interesting SARS-CoV-2 features include binding
of the amino acids of six key interfaces on RBD to ACE2, and the furin
protease cleavage site of SARS-CoV-2. N501Y mutation
occurred in the RBD of S protein at position 501, where asparagine
(N) was replaced by tyrosine (Y).19N501Y mutation changes the virus envelope surface protein
and increases its ability to enter human cells and to bind to the
ACE2 receptor. P681H mutation occurred in S1/S2 adjacent
to the furin cleavage site. Furin cleavage decreased the stability
of S protein, thus exposing the open domain. As a result, the binding
affinity between the S protein and ACE2 receptor was greatly improved,
and the binding ability and infectivity to the virus were enhanced.20 The deletion of two amino acids (H69 and V70)
at positions 69 and 70 in the spike is one of many repeated deletions
observed in the N-terminal domain of S protein. This double deletion
may lead to conformational changes of S protein.21 Transmissibility of B.1.1.7(Alpha) mutation appears to
be significantly enhanced..

At present, there is no evidence
that new strains lead to higher
mortality or affect the efficacy of the vaccine..

Although N501Y mutation and
several other mutations
also appeared in strain, called 501Y.V2 (B1.351(Beta)),
it was completely independent of the B.1.1.7(Alpha). The 501Y.V2 mutant strain has stronger infectivity. The transmission rate is
increased by 50%, and the virulence of this strain also appears to
be increased.21 Most of the new cases in
Africa are caused by this mutant strain, but as the detection capacity
of novel coronavirus (NCV) in Africa lags behind other regions, the
prevalence of NCV circulating there is unclear. 501Y.V2 may also become
a new dominant strain. Several mutations in the S protein, including K417T, E484K, and N501Y, and no deletion
at 69/70 were detected in this SARS-CoV-2 variant. E484K may cause spatial interference in antibody recognition because negatively
charged glutamate is replaced by positively charged lysine..

A third novel variant strain has emerged in Nigeria, which contains
a P681H mutation in B.1.1.7(Alpha) pedigree. There
are some similarities between this strain and the previous two strains,
but these similarities may be caused by independent evolution. One
of the prolines (P) in S protein was replaced by histidine (H) in P681H mutation. The substitution site is located at the
site where “TMPRSS2 enzyme” cleaves S protein; therefore,
this mutation can lead to increased infection ability.22N439K is a common receptor-binding
motif (RBM) mutation. SARS-CoV-2 RBM, which is the main target of
RBD neutralizing Ab reaction, is a highly variable S protein region
in circulating virus. The N439K variant has C to A modification at
the third codon position. N439K S protein enhanced
the binding affinity between the hACE2 receptor and the N439K virus. Compared to wild type, N439K S protein had
similar in vitro replication fitness and a similar clinical profile.23.

“Double mutation” virus
has also affected many countries.
The official name of “double mutation” virus is new
coronavirus variant B.1.617.2(Delta). According to the genomic data,
B.1.617.2(Delta) may be more infectious than the wild-type coronavirus.
Its transmission speed is similar to that of B.1.1.7(Alpha), but higher
than that of B.1.351. Main B.1.617.2(Delta) mutations are E484Q and L452R. Although several other
mutations were detected in this variant, they do not appear to have
a significant effect on the characteristics and behavior of the virus. E484Q refers to the substitution of glutamic acid (E) at
site 484 of S protein by glutamine (Q). The corresponding nucleotide
change is the substitution of guanine (G) at site 23012 by cytosine
(C) (G23012C). Compared to other variants, E484Q endows
B.1.617.2(Delta) with stronger binding potential to hACE2 and better
ability to escape the host immune system. L452R refers
to the substitution of leucine (L) by arginine (R) at the 452 site
of S protein. The corresponding nucleotide change is the substitution
of thymine (T) at site 22917 by guanine (G) (T22917G). L452R mutation leads to a stronger affinity of
S protein for the receptor, reduction of the immune system recognition
ability, and increased resistance to antibodies. Vaccine breakthrough
infections are of the major concern at this point. E484Q and L452R mutations may increase the ability of
the virus to attach to cells and spread, thus increasing virus infectivity
and affecting vaccine effectiveness. Although B.1.617.2(Delta) might
have increased ability to escape the immune system, the existing vaccines
may still have a protective effect; however, this will require further
investigation..

The microevolution leads to constant changes
of SARS-CoV-2. SARS-CoV-2
mutants were also found in animals. SARS-CoV-2 variant (called P.1)
was identified, which is a branch of B.1.1.28 lineage.24 This lineage contains 17 unique amino acid changes
and 3 deletions. This variant contains three mutations in the spike
receptor-binding domain: K417T, E484K, and N501Y.25 van Dorp
et al.26 screened the SARS-CoV-2 genome
isolated from minks to determine the existence of common repeated
mutations in minks. Several new SARS-CoV-2 mutants were found in patients
with low immunity, thus highlighting the rapid evolution of SARS-CoV-2.27 Efficient and reliable detection of multiple
mutations of SARS-CoV-2 is therefore crucial for the prevention of
the spread of SARS-CoV-2 variants and control of pandemic.28.

Virus infections are among the main causes
of human morbidity and
mortality. A number of techniques and methods have been developed
to detect viruses, bacteria, and other pathogens, including colorimetry,
fluorescence polarization, and electrochemical analysis.29 Diagnosis of viral infections includes direct
detection and serological methods. Viruses can be isolated from cell
culture to identify their nucleic acids or antigens.30 Nuclear acid sequence-based amplification (NASBA), restriction
enzyme analysis (REA), direct immunofluorescence assay (IFA), enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) are among the most frequently used methods
for virus detection.31 Multiple PCR can
simultaneously amplify several nucleic acid targets in a single sample.
The standard method for the detection of PCR products, agarose gel
electrophoresis, is usually combined with Southern blot to determine
sequence specificity. However, this method is complex and time consuming.32.

Early detection can prevent SARS-CoV-2
from spreading and help
control the pandemic. SARS-CoV-2 can be identified by nucleic acid
detection and serological detection.33,34 The virus
in the lysate of host cells was detected by amplification and sequencing.
Reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) is the gold standard for the detection
of SARS-CoV-2.35 However, SARS-CoV-2 is
an RNA virus. If not stored properly or submitted for examination
in time, it can degrade, leading to false-negative results.36 Moreover, the immunoassay based on antigen–antibody
interaction can also be used for the detection of SARS-CoV-2.37.

Genomic sequencing and phylogenetic analysis
are often used to
identify mutations in SARS-CoV-2, which is helpful to understand the
roles of point mutations in the transmissibility and toxicity of SARS-CoV-2.10,38,39 For example, a combination of
antibody detection and RT-PCR has been used to detect D614G mutant.40.

However, these traditional methods are
often complex, cumbersome,
and time consuming. Furthermore, they require specific equipment and
professionals to operate (Table 1). To overcome these shortcomings, biosensors can be
used to detect SARS-CoV-2 and its mutations. With the increasing number
of virus variants, it is urgent to develop efficient, rapid, and multiple
biosensor technologies for simultaneous detection of SARS-CoV-2 mutations
(Figure 1B).41,42.

The genetic evolution of
SARS-CoV-2 RBD may be affected by host
gene editing, virus proofreading, random genetic drift, and natural
selection, thus resulting in the emergence of more infectious variants.48 SARS-CoV-2 mutations can lead to the reduction
of the neutralization of antibodies. S protein mutation may weaken
the binding between SARS-CoV-2 S protein and antibodies, thus potentially
reducing the efficiency and efficacy of the existing vaccines and
of the antibody therapy and increasing the SARS-CoV-2 transmission
and infectivity. The change of binding free energy (BFE) between RBD
and ACE2 can predict the impact of mutations on SARS-CoV-2 infectivity
based on artificial intelligence prediction and genotyping of tens
of thousands of patient genomic isolates. Delta variant contains both
T478K and L452R. It is the most infectious strain among all variants
with infectivity about 4 times that of the original virus. Detailed
studies on how each RBD mutation affects infectivity and antibodies
can be found on the mutation analyzer (Table 2).48,49.

HAU: hemagglutination;
LSPCF: localized
surface plasmon coupled fluorescence; HAV: Hepatitis A virus; HBV:
Hepatitis B virus; HCV: Hepatitis C virus; HIV: Human immunodeficiency
virus..

The mutation of COVID-19
diagnostic target may lead to the destruction
of the diagnostic reagent currently used, resulting in false-positive
and false-negative detection. The location, frequency, and coding
protein of SARS-CoV-2 mutation were identified and analyzed in the
global environment recently.50 To avoid
mutation prone diagnostic regions, diagnostic target selection and
probe optimization should be based on nucleotide and gene mutation
frequency analysis.50.

Biosensors have
been used to detect
different types of viruses, including human coronavirus,51 HIV,52 hepatitis
virus,53 Zika virus,54 and various influenza viruses.55 Biosensor technology can also be applied for efficient and reliable
detection of SARS-CoV-2 and its variants. Seo et al. developed a field-effect
transistor (FET) biosensor by coating graphene sheet with an antibody
against SARS-CoV-2 S protein for SARS-CoV-2 detection in clinical
samples.56 Yadav et al. proposed a novel
dielectric modulated field-effect transistor (FET) biosensor, which
was improved by combining with a bimetallic control gate. The biosensor
detects the spike and envelope proteins of SARS-CoV-2 by direct current
and radio frequency parameters of charge density in viral proteins.57 Murugan et al. designed two field-deployable
portable plasma optical fiber absorbance biosensor (P-FAB) devices
to detect N protein of virus directly from saliva.58 Qiu et al. developed a bifunctional plasma biosensor combining
plasma photothermal (PPT) effect and local surface plasmon resonance
(LSPR) sensing transduction. The bifunctional plasma biosensor containing
a Au nanoabsorbent (AuNIs) chip selectively detects specific sequences
from SARS-CoV-2 by nucleic acid hybridization.59 Arshak et al. reported detection of SARS-CoV-2 by field-effect
sensors (FEDs). FEDs can directly identify the complete virus, the
virus antigen, the virus nucleic acid, or the antibody produced by
the immune system through the complete particle charge.60 Using antibodies, enzymes, or aptamers, novel
biosensors can be designed to detect coronaviruses. Peng et al. developed
a novel near-infrared phase-modulated plasma biosensor for the sensitive
detection of SARS-CoV-2 and its spike glycoprotein.61 Chen et al. reported modification of aptamers and their
binding to SARS-CoV-2 N protein. The diluted SARS-CoV-2 N protein
in human serum was detected by aptamer, and enzyme-linked aptamer
binding assay (ELAA) was performed. Biotinylated ssDNA was used to
detect N protein and then the horseradish peroxidase (HRP) conjugation
system was used to detect N protein.62 The
formation of G-quadruplex interacts with the viral helicase NSP13,
which can catalyze the unfolding of G-quadruplex and promote the transcription
and replication of SARS-CoV-2. The g-tetraploid structure was found
in the SARS-CoV-2 genome, which can be used as a target for antiviral
drugs.63 The G-quadruplex-based biosensor
can be used as a potential tool to detect SARS-CoV-2.64 Monoclonal antibodies against ACE2 and S1 were used as
capture and detection probes in lateral flow immunoassays. The SARS-CoV-2
S1 protein was selectively detected by the lateral flow immunoassay
based on ACE2, in which the binding of protein with membrane-bound
antibody led to the change of cell bioelectricity.65 Kim et al. developed a SARS-CoV-2 specific biosensor based
on LFIA and used scFv-Fc antibody to distinguish different coronaviruses.66 The detection of SARS-CoV-2 by biosensors based
on electrical and optical signals, such as surface-enhanced Raman
scattering (SERS), has also been reported.67.

A biosensor might also be a good tool for the detection of
SARS-CoV-2 mutation. The surface plasmon resonance (SPR) technique
was used to study the effect of D614G on the binding
kinetics of SARS-CoV-2 S protein with human ACE2.68 SPR-based biosensors can be constructed to distinguish G614 and D614 and detect SARS-CoV-2 and D614G mutation. This suggests that SPR can be also used
to detect RBD mutations that correlate with the SARS-CoV-2 infectivity..

Furthermore, it is feasible to design specific aptamers as recognition
materials for SARS-CoV-2 mutation targets and develop biosensors for
detecting other SARS-CoV-2 mutants, including those with mutations
in RBD, at the gene level. Various biological cognitive elements and
detection principles of biosensor technology can be applied to detect
SARS-CoV-2 and its mutation. Common biosensor technology combined
with amplification technology,69 restriction
enzyme digestion, CRISPR/Cas technology,70,71 nanomaterials,72 and other strategies
can be used to identify SARS-CoV-2 mutations. Specific capture and
detection probes can be designed to identify the specific mutated
sequences to develop an efficient, sensitive, and simple biosensor
for mutation detection. The development of biosensors based on electrochemistry,
piezoelectricity, fluorescence, surface plasmon resonance, and electrochemiluminescence
combined with the signal amplification strategy will be important
for the fast and reliable detection of SARS-CoV-2 and its mutation
(Figure 2)..

Biosensor technology
for detection of SARS-CoV-2. The specific
signals generated by biosensors can be used to detect SARS-CoV-2 and
its mutation using a variety of detection principles, such as SPR,
fluorescence, electrochemistry, aptamer based, CRISPR-Cas, and others.
Digital intelligence can be applied for the point-of-care testing
(figure was created in part with BioRender)..

Zhao et al. reported the construction of a calixarene-functionalized
graphene oxide electrochemical sensor targeting SARS-CoV-2 RNA. Based
on the super sandwich recognition strategy, SARS-CoV-2 was detected
using portable electrochemical smartphones.73 Bokelmann et al. tested SARS-CoV-2 instant care batch by combining
hybrid capture and improved colorimetric LAMP and analyzed the color
based on smartphone APP.74 Fozouni et al.
reported an amplification-free CRISPR-Cas13a method, which was based
on a fluorescence microscope and the reaction chamber of mobile phone
to quantify Cas13a and analyze the generated fluorescence signal for
direct detection of SARS-CoV-2.75 Smartphone
can be applied for the detection at the point-of-care..

Considering
the increase of mutations in SARS-CoV-2, it is urgent
to detect multiple mutations of SARS-CoV-2 simultaneously with integrating
and combining multiple biosensing technologies.76,77 Multisensor technology can also be used to detect multiple variants
of SARS-CoV-2 at the same time, by providing a fast, effective, and
reliable point-of-care testing (POCT) for genotyping mutations..

Integrated biosensors have been
applied successfully in the areas of enzyme, DNA, and proteomics analysis,
diagnosis, and drug discovery. Biomarker detection in body fluids
can lead to disease diagnosis and identification of clinically important
physiological parameters. It can also be used for the simultaneous
detection of bacteria and viruses.78 SARS-CoV-2
virus and its mutation can also be detected by multiple integrated
biosensors. Microfluidic chip technology allows the manipulation of
fluids in microchannels.79,80 The integration of
biosensors and microfluidics has attracted the interest of the scientific
community. Most components of biosensors can be miniaturized to form
arrays and integrated into the laboratory equipment of chip (lab on
a chip). Multiple integrated biosensors improve the analysis ability
and provide a miniaturized and low-cost analysis platform.81 The design and fabrication of novel microfluidic
devices require polymers with improved optical, thermal, and mechanical
properties. Some materials used in the fabrication of sensor microfluidic
devices include paper, glass, silicon, plastic, and polycarbonate.82 Multiple biosensors integrated in these miniaturized
microfluidic devices are widely used to analyze complex samples from
lab, environment, and clinical settings. With the advantages in minimal
sample preparation and fast operation, multiple analytes in multiple
samples can be detected and identified simultaneously.83.

Integrated biosensors have a series of
biochemical recognition elements, which can be transformed into quantifiable
optical, mechanical, or electronic signals. Taitt et al. developed
a multianalyte array biosensor (MAAB), which can simultaneously detect
and identify multiple analytes in complex samples using rapid fluorescence
immunoassay. The sensitivity is close to that of gold standard ELISA.84 Optical sensors based on fluorescence, colorimetry,
and surface plasmon resonance have lower detection limits. An optical
biosensor does not need any physical contact with the sample, which
is compatible with physiological solution, and is insensitive to the
change of solution. Compared with the popular optical-based detection,
the signal generated by the integrated electrochemical biosensor is
electronic, which has the advantages of high sensitivity, small volume,
low cost, fast response, easy integration of signal, and compatibility
with microprocessing technology. Electrochemical biosensors can be
divided into amperometric, voltammetric, impedance, and chrono coulometric
biosensors. The shape, size, structural materials, and surface properties
of electrodes play an important role in the performance of electrochemical
integrated biosensors.85 Based on the number
of tags, multiple electrochemical biosensors can be divided into single
tag and multitag integrated biosensors. Crosstalk between microelectrodes
is still the main problem in electrochemical array, which should be
avoided in the design of integrated biosensors. A field-effect transistor,
nanotechnology, and printing technology also bring new opportunities
for integrated electrochemical biosensors.86 Using electrochemiluminescence strategy combined with chip microarray
is another integrated biosensor technology.87.

The ongoing pandemic has shown the urgent need to develop
POCT
equipment, which can be used for the effective detection of the SARS-CoV-2
and its variants. The integration of microfluidics, arrays, nanomaterials,
chips, and biosensors lays the foundation for the design of POCT devices.88.

Optical multiple biosensing technology is
a common strategy for multiple virus detection. Jenison et al. designed
a thin-film biosensor, on which the capture probe was coated. The
nucleic acid hybridization was transformed into a molecular film by
the enzyme-catalyzed reaction. The existence of the target sequence
changed the interference mode of the biosensor surface, resulting
in color change. The technology was applied to chip integration. The
capture probe containing the human respiratory virus sequence could
simultaneously detect six virus-specific RT-PCR products from infected
cell lysates in 10 min. This technique can be widely used in allele
identification and detection of infectious diseases.89 Hu et al. developed a label-free multicolor biosensor combined
with exonuclease-assisted autocatalytic target cycle amplification
technology for multiple detection of DNA. Exoenzyme III (ExoIII) is
a sequence-independent enzyme, which can catalyze the gradual removal
of a single nucleotide at the 3′-OH end of double-stranded
DNA without specific recognition sites. The biosensor can distinguish
target DNA simultaneously and polychromatically analyze different
oligonucleotides in samples and construct a multichannel DNA detection
platform.90 HBV is a common infectious
hepatitis disease. Rapid and effective detection of HBV biomarkers
can avoid the risk of infection and prevent the outbreak of HBV..

Biosensors combine fluorescent nanomaterials including quantum dots
as signal recognition elements for virus detection. Takemura et al.
constructed an immunofluorescence nano biosensor for influenza virus
induced by local surface plasmon resonance (LSPR). The QD fluorescence
signal induced by AuNPs was combined with antineuraminidase antibody
(anti-NAAB) to successfully detect H1N1, H3N2 influenza viruses, and
norovirus.91 Xu et al. developed protein
microarray-based biosensors, including single- channel and multichannel
arrays, and used SPR technology to detect five biomarkers of HBV serology.30 Shi et al. reported a biosensor based on SPR.
Specific oligonucleotides were fixed on SPR chip, biotin-labeled PCR
primers were used, and streptavidin was introduced to amplify the
signal after hybridization to detect pharyngeal swab samples of nine
common respiratory viruses.92 The optical
chip sensor has different antibody sensing channels as a biological
recognition element. The interaction between the target antigen in
the sample and their surface-immobilized antibodies leads to the local
change of refractive index, so as to detect viruses and other biological
hazards.93 Most SPR biosensor chips are
expensive, and it is difficult to reuse them, which limits their commercialization.
Yoo et al. developed a reusable magnetic SPR sensor chip, which can
repeatedly detect various target molecules in the traditional SPR
system. The device was used to detect H1N1 influenza virus with good
repeatability and did not need any chemical process to refresh.94 This method can integrate multichannel chip
with its advantages and detect other viruses repeatedly, thus reducing
the costs. Antibodies, complementary nucleic acids, and aptamers are
the most useful recognition elements for virus recognition..

Antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) is a traditional recognition element,
which is a complementary sequence of some unique sites in virus genome.
Colloids and nanostructured surfaces have fundamentally different
signal amplification mechanisms. They modify aptamers as recognition
elements of surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) biosensors
for the quantitative and qualitative detection of various viruses.95 Kim designed an integrated rapid biosensor system
for air sampling and simultaneous enrichment of coronavirus and influenza
virus. In this study, aerosol viruses including human coronavirus
229E (HCoV-229E), influenza A H1N1 subtype (A/H1N1), and influenza
A H3N2 subtype (A/H3N2) were captured by an electrostatic air sampler
in continuously flowing liquid and protein-coated magnetic particles
for simultaneous detection of hydrosol to hydrosol (HTH)-enriched
jet channels. The collected undetectable samples became detectable
samples within 10 min during HTH enrichment, and the integrated device
was used for virus risk assessment of the field environment.96 Sciuto et al. described an integrated biosensor
platform based on silicon plastic hybrid disk laboratory technology,
which can amplify nucleic acid by qRT-PCR and comprehensively extract,
purify and detect HBV in an integrated format.197 Bruls et al. introduced a nanoparticle-based optical magnetic
immunoassay technology, which is used for magnetic actuation and optical
detection in a fixed sample fluid. Photomagnetic technology can be
used to monitor the materials on the binding surface of magnetic nanoparticles
with high sensitivity and multichannel integrated detection. This
study promoted the development of nursing point diagnosis.97 Optical array sensor has high precision and
strong anti-interference ability..

Electrochemical biosensors for virus detection
use conductive and semiconductor materials as transducers. The target
virus and the electrode immobilized biological recognition element
combine with the related chemical energy, which is converted into
electrical energy by electrochemical methods involving electrode and
electrolyte solution. Based on the electrochemical sensing method,
the virus was identified and quantified by immunoassay, DNA-based
detection of antibody, and nucleic acid sequence.98 Biosensors based on semiconductor field-effect devices
(BioFEDs) use their intrinsic charge to detect charged biomolecules
and biological particles without labels. Different types of biological
FEDs have been successfully used to detect a variety of dangerous
viruses. The device can detect a number of virus-related parameters
(virus particles, virus antigen, virus nucleic acid, and antibody
against virus) and provide more accurate and reliable disease diagnosis.
The test samples come from a wide range of sources, including whole
blood, plasma, serum, urine, saliva, nasopharyngeal swab, or mouthwash.
FEDs, plant virus enhancers, and their combinations play an important
role in the early diagnosis and treatment of infectious diseases in
the future.99.

Nanotechnology improves
the performance of biosensors by changing the properties of materials
and particle size.100 Nanomaterials enhance
the affinity, selectivity, and sensitivity of virus detection, for
example, carbon nanomaterials, quantum dots, metal nanoclusters, polymer
nanocomposites, plasma nanomaterials, nanomaterials, and other nanomaterials.
Integrated biosensors based on nanomaterials can be used to detect
clinical pathogens of bacteria and viruses.101 Combining the development of nanomaterials with biosensor technology,
a new tool to detect and identify bacteria or viruses can be produced,
named nano biosensor. Nano biosensors can improve the sensitivity
and specificity of detection, nanoscale integration, and real-time
detection, using a variety of label-free sensing mechanisms.102 Graphene-based biosensors can detect different
types of viruses, such as Ebola virus, Zika virus, and influenza.
Recent studies have shown that the sensor can detect SARS-CoV-2 virus
in clinical samples, SARS-CoV-2 antigen in standard buffer and transport
medium, and cultured SARS-CoV-2 virus when SARS-CoV-2 spike antibody
binds to graphene sheet in a sensing region.103 Torrente-Rodríguez et al. mass-produce flexible laser engraving
graphene sensor array to detect viral antigen nucleocapsid protein,
IgM and IgG antibodies, and inflammatory biomarker C-reactive protein.
Hassan et al. reviewed virus detection systems based on plasma metamaterials.
Plasma metamaterials have potential for real-time sensing, label-free
sensing mechanism, and miniaturization of sensor chips. Based on the
fluid characteristics of the sample, the nano plasma biosensor chip
was introduced. HIV, coronavirus, influenza, dengue fever, adenovirus,
Zika virus, hepatitis, and norovirus have been successfully detected.104 Two kinds of low pathogenicity common avian
influenza viruses (H3N8 and H4N5) were detected in wild ducks, which
were well correlated with the results of ELISA. This method has high
throughput and requires less serum to obtain more data.105 Electrochemical biosensors are simple, affordable,
and compatible with multiple and immediate medical strategies. They
are reliable tools for virus detection..

Multisensor technology can simultaneously
detect multiple viruses, identify SARS-CoV-2, and simultaneously detect
multiple biomarkers of SARS-CoV-2. Minjun et al. developed a new one-step
quadruple real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(rRT-PCR) detection method for the diagnosis, differential diagnosis,
and coinfection detection of SARS-CoV-2.31,127 The system was optimized by screening primers and probes. The ORF1ab
and N genes of SARS-CoV-2, influenza A virus (hIAV), and influenza
B virus (hIBV) were detected and identified simultaneously. Compared
with single rRT-PCR, quadruple rRT-PCR can improve the detection efficiency
by reducing the number of single detection. It has the advantages
of good repeatability and high sensitivity.128.

The response of specific immunoglobulin G (IgG) and M (IgM)
antibody to S, N, and RBD of SARS-CoV-2 occurred within 6–15
days after onset of infection.129 Johnson
et al. reported a multiplex solid-phase chemiluminescence method for
simultaneous detection of IgG binding to four SARS-CoV-2 antigens
(including SARS-CoV-2 trimer spike, RBD, spike N-terminal domain,
and nucleocapsid antigen), quantitative antibody-induced inhibition
of ACE2 binding, and evaluation of the function of antispike antibody.
This method can be used to detect anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibody within
14 days after the onset of symptoms of COVID-19 with repeatability
and high specificity. It can be used to determine the antibody function
and has a good correlation with S protein antibody concentration.130 The performance of the current lateral flow
immunoassay device is not enough to meet the requirements of most
individual patients with COVID-19. Shaw et al. provided a new and
rapid quantitative multiplex gold nanoparticle technology to evaluate
the potential of anti-SARS-CoV-2 antigen–antibody detection
reliably and accurately, so as to assist clinical diagnosis and decision
making. The portable desktop multiplex array technology described
in this study has been proved to be effective in detecting antibodies
after vaccination. Each array consists of antibodies that capture
CRP; proteins A/G that capture total Fc binding antibodies; S1, S2,
and N proteins that capture COVID-19 recombinant antigens; SARS membrane
(M); and envelope (E) proteins. A quantitative measurement of the
response of IgG, IgA, and IgM to SARS-CoV-2 S1, S2, and N proteins
is provided.131 Lin et al. have successfully
developed a multidetection tool for SARS-CoV-2, which integrates a
diagnostic chip, self-made portable fluorescence detector, and microfluidic
immunoassay technology. The chip consists of a sample loading chamber,
a waste container, and a fluid channel for fluorescence immunoassay
including a capture area and a test area. The fluorescence detection
analyzer has the functions of centrifugation, fluorescence detection,
and result display. Microfluidic immunoassay is used for sensitive
and simultaneous detection of IgG/IgM/antigen of SARS-CoV-2 within
15 min. A portable microfluidic immunoassay system has been established,
which is convenient for high-throughput, sensitive, and rapid detection
(<15 min). At the same time, the IgG/IgM/antigen of SARS-CoV-2
can be detected many times and on the spot. The system is expected
to be used for quantitative and sensitive detection of biomarkers
of various diseases.132.

Microarray
studies detect point mutations and SNPs in multiple
samples in parallel.133 Multiplicity allows
the quantification of multiple analytes in one step, providing advantages
over a single test by shorter processing time, lower sample volume,
and lower cost per test. SARS-CoV-2 can mutate in vivo and in the
process of transmission and cross infect in the process of human and
environmental transmission. SARS-CoV-2 has been spread in many common
ways, and individual mutant strains have become the mainstream, whether
it was D614G, N501Y, and P681H mutation, or 69/70 deletion in B.1.1.7(Alpha)
lineage, or K417T, E484K, and N501Y mutation in both B.1.351 and P.1 lineages. Y501 in mutant RBD can coordinate well with Y41 and K353 in ACE2 through hydrophobic interaction,
which improves the binding affinity of RBD with ACE2.28,33 Compared with wild-type strains, both of them spread rapidly in
the population and may cause more serious diseases. Both vaccination
and natural infection against SARS-CoV-2 can produce a “polyclonal”
response to the S protein. The accumulation of multiple mutations
in S protein may evade the ability of natural immunity or vaccine-induced
immunity, but the impact of the known mutations and those which might
emerge in the future on the existing vaccines will require further
investigation. Most commercial PCR tests have multiple targets for
virus detection, so even if the mutation affects one of the targets,
other PCR targets will still work.134.

SARS-CoV-2 mutations can be detected at the protein level and gene
level. Biosensor technology is also widely used in the detection of
virus mutation.135 The mutation of ACE2
binding S protein plays a key role. We can design a biosensor to detect
SARS-CoV-2 mutant protein by ACE2 protein. Biosensors based on aptamers
and antibodies can be designed to distinguish mutated S protein. Multiple
mutations of SARS-CoV-2 can be detected simultaneously using multiple
biosensor technology. Antibodies or aptamers that specifically recognize
S protein, N protein, and RBD mutation of SARS-CoV-2 can be integrated
into a chip for simultaneous detection as biological recognition elements.
The application of biosensor technology based on the gene level is
more promising. RT-PCR and gene sequencing were used for detection,
combined with different signal amplification techniques. It was applied
to the electrochemical and photochemical detection of SARS-CoV-2.69,70 The objective was to design and optimize the primers in accordance
with SARS-CoV-2 mutation to realize the detection of SARS-CoV-2. Sequencing
technology provides high throughput and accurate genotyping of SARS-CoV-2.136 Multiple mutations of SARS-CoV-2 were detected
by electrochemical and optical techniques, lateral flow strip, sequencing,
or microarray. The hybridization technique using point mutation probe
and corresponding perfect matching probe can also be used for SARS-CoV-2
mutation detection reliably. Microarray hybridization can be used
to identify single base mismatches from small samples to thousands
of samples, using dozens to hundreds of probes. Microarray technology
can be used for rapid and accurate point mutation detection and early
clinical diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2 mutation.137.

At
present, the most common SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid detection uses
nasopharyngeal swabs. The biosensor array for detection of SARS-CoV-2
and its mutation can be integrated into a small platform for increased
portability. The results of biosensor detection can be interpreted,
and the automatic quantitative detection of SARS-CoV-2 and mutation
can be performed with the help of a smartphone APP. Novel portable
biosensors can be used for real-time detection and remote monitoring
of patients with COVID-19.138 A number
of novel biosensors for the reliable and efficient diagnosis of pathogens
have been designed recently. The paper-based microfluidic bioassay
does not require complex equipment, reagents, or power supply. It
is low-cost, fast, sensitive, accurate, and easy to use and transport.
A paper biosensor can also be applied for the detection of SARS-CoV-2.139.

In the future, digital biosensor technology
can be used to develop digital bar code particles and a microsimulation
architecture for multiplex analyte quantification. Real-time reading
through a mobile phone is important for POCT diagnosis. It is dedicated
to the functionalization of physical bar code particles and has specific
antibodies that are crucial to the attachment of biomarkers on the
cell surface. It can be used to detect SARS-CoV-2 biomarkers.140.

Clustering regularly spaced short palindromic
repeats (CRISPR)
is a technology that won the Nobel Prize in chemistry in 2020. CRISPR
is a special genomic DNA sequence derived from an acquired immune
system in bacteria and archaea. It can recognize and destroy the invading
virus by a special enzyme. The purified Cas9 protein is a double RNA-directed
endonuclease. It has been shown that the CRISPR-Cas9 system can cut
any DNA strand and modify genes in living cells. Consequently, CRISPR
has become the most popular gene-editing technology. CRISPR/CAS is
an RNA-directed adaptive immune system, including programmable CAS
endonuclease and CRISPR RNA (crRNAs), which can be used for nucleic
acid recognition and editing.73 In recent
years, the nucleic acid detection technology based on the CRISPR/CAS
system has developed rapidly, mainly relying on the technical principle
that the system can combine CRISPR-associated enzymes (including Cas12,
Cas13, Cas14) with the target sequence and cleave it under the guidance
of single-stranded guide RNA.74 The specific
high-sensitivity enzyme report unlock (SHERLOCK) technology developed
combines various CRISPR/CAS enzymes. Based on nucleic acid isothermal
amplification combined with the CRISPR/CAS nucleic acid detection
system, it can simultaneously detect a variety of nucleic acids, which
is suitable for rapid diagnosis including infectious diseases and
sensitive genotyping.141 Biosensor technology
based on CRISPR/CAS has been applied to detect hepatitis virus, influenza
virus, and others. Recent studies have shown that the Sherlock technology
based on CRISPR can detect SARS-CoV-2, and the synthetic RNA fragment
of the SARS-CoV-2 virus can detect the AM level internal target sequence
within 1 h.75 However, there is still a
gap in the research on the construction of a CRISPR/CAS sensor array
for different SARS-CoV-2 mutations..

CRISPR protein is a nuclease,
which can decompose viral nucleic
acid. It can be used for sensitive, cheap, and rapid detection of
viruses and bacteria. The CRISPR/CAS system has been successfully
used to detect virus mutations. SARS-CoV-2 mutants have several potential
CAS crRNA targets. The binding of Cas13 to the SARS-CoV-2 mutant gene
activates trans cleavage Cas13, which cleaves the specific RNA strands
and activates the CRISPR/Cas system, thus producing a bright signal.
A SARS-CoV-2 mutation array sensing platform based on the CRISPR/CAS
system can be constructed. Finally, the mobile phone intelligent detection
software can be designed to read the signal characteristics of the
test strip for automatic detection and analysis. Reliable and efficient
detection of multiple SARS-CoV-2 mutations will require optimizations
of the conditions and crRNA screening..

Biosensor manufacturing
using nano/micromanufacturing methods,
material chemistry, electronics, bioelectronics, and other fields
of innovative technology and scientific progress, coupled with digital
communication technology and wireless sensor network integration,
is among the main development trends in this exciting area of research..

The manuscript
was written through the contributions of all authors..

The authors declare no
competing financial interest..

The work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of
Shenzhen City (Project number JCYJ20180306172131515)..

