.

At the time of preparing this Perspective, large-scale vaccination for COVID-19 is in
progress, aiming to bring the pandemic under control through vaccine-induced herd
immunity. Not only does this vaccination effort represent an unprecedented scientific
and technological breakthrough, moving us from the rapid analysis of viral genomes to
design, manufacture, clinical trial testing, and use authorization within the time frame
of less than a year, but it also highlights rapid progress in the implementation of
nanotechnology to assist vaccine development. These advances enable us to deliver
nucleic acid and conformation-stabilized subunit vaccines to regional lymph nodes, with
the ability to trigger effective humoral and cellular immunity that prevents viral
infection or controls disease severity. In addition to a brief description of the design
features of unique cationic lipid and virus-mimicking nanoparticles for accomplishing
spike protein delivery and presentation by the cognate immune system, we also discuss
the importance of adjuvancy and design features to promote cooperative B- and T-cell
interactions in lymph node germinal centers, including the use of epitope-based
vaccines. Although current vaccine efforts have demonstrated short-term efficacy and
vaccine safety, key issues are now vaccine durability and adaptability against viral
variants. We present a forward-looking perspective of how vaccine design can be adapted
to improve durability of the immune response and vaccine adaptation to overcome immune
escape by viral variants. Finally, we consider the impact of nano-enabled approaches in
the development of COVID-19 vaccines for improved vaccine design against other
infectious agents, including pathogens that may lead to future pandemics..

This article is made available via the ACS COVID-19
subset for unrestricted RESEARCH re-use and analyses in any form or by any
means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for the
duration of the World Health Organization (WHO) declaration of COVID-19 as a global
pandemic..

The challenge of developing a SARS-CoV-2 vaccine capable of intervening in the alarming
rate of spread and mortality, the likes of which has not been seen since the 1918 influenza
contagion, has been a daunting task. Remarkably, the 4–14 year time frame that was
required for developing mumps, measles, polio, or human papilloma virus vaccines was
condensed into a year to accomplish the same task for COVID-19.1.

Infectious disease experts have cautioned for years about the pandemic potential of
coronaviruses. These concerns were confirmed by the emergence of SARS-CoV-1 in 2003, with a
case fatality rate of 15%, and the Middle Eastern Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus
(MERS-CoV) in 2012, with a fatality rate of 36%.2 These short-lived
outbreaks stimulated interest in understanding coronavirus pathogenesis and immunity,
leading to the development of experimental vaccines in animal models.3−8 Unfortunately, due to the
finite duration of these disease episodes, none of the efforts resulted in vaccine
development for human use. Nonetheless, these efforts provided critical information about
the role of the trimeric spike (S) glycoprotein, which is responsible for SARS-CoV uptake
into host cells through binding interactions with angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2)
receptors (Figures 1 and 2).3,6,7,9−11 In particular, it was revealed that the development of neutralizing
antibodies against the receptor-binding domain (RBD) of the SARS-CoV-1 or MERS-CoV spike
were effective in blocking viral uptake. This finding was instrumental in earmarking the
generation of neutralizing antibodies against the spike protein as a viable vaccine strategy
against coronaviruses.3,6,7,9−11 Moreover, research on experimental SARS-CoV-1 and
respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) vaccines helped to refine a structural vaccinology
approach in which the spike or fusion proteins were engineered to obtain a stabilized
antigen conformation that optimizes the generation of neutralizing
antibodies.12−14 These efforts subsequently
became a blueprint for expedited SARS-CoV-2 vaccine development..

SARS-CoV-2 components for generating protective antiviral immune responses. These
include the spike or S glycoprotein, membrane or M protein, envelope or E protein, and
nucleocapsid or N protein (associates with viral RNA genome; not shown). The current
choice for vaccine generation is the S glycoprotein, which is capable of generating
neutralizing antibody responses in addition to eliciting CD8+ and
CD4+ T-cells. The spike protein exhibits a screw-like shape, composed of a
larger head and a long, thin stalk.206 Three spike proteins interact
to form a trimer that is held in place by a stalk (composed of S1 and S2 regions), which
stands away from the viral surface and exhibits a host protease (furin) cleavage site,
the role of which is explained in Figure 2.
Adapted with permission from ref (206). Copyright
2020 CAS..

SARS-CoV-2 spike (S) glycoprotein. (A) S protein includes (i) the trimeric S1 subunit,
which contains three receptor-binding domains (RBDs) (two of which are lying down, with
one standing up); (ii) the membrane-associated S2 subunit, which includes a fusion
peptide; (iii) a transmembrane (TM) anchor; and (iv) an intracellular tail.60 (B) Schematic to show the early stage of viral uptake.60 Viral uptake commences with proteolytic cleavage by furin, which
separates the S1 and S2 subunits, enabling one RBD to stand up. Next, the second and
then the third RBD domains stand up. The achievement of a prefusion complex (with three
RBDs standing up) leads to two important outcomes: (i) exposure and immune recognition
of S1 epitopes that were covered up by the RBDs in the lying down conformation and (ii)
high affinity binding of RBDs to the host hACE2 receptor to enable viral docking. Once
docked onto the host cell membrane, the contraction of the S2 fusion peptide blends the
viral envelope with the host cell membrane. Adapted with permission from ref (60) under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0
(CC BY). Copyright 2020 The Authors..

As the explosive spread of SARS-CoV-2 infections and accompanying morbidity and mortality
became apparent, vaccine producers recognized that curtailing the pandemic would require
technologies that support rapid development, scalable manufacturing, and rapid deployment.
An attractive approach, albeit one that had never been tested at large scale in humans, was
the delivery of mRNA for in situ production of genetically optimized
antigens.1,15−19
Although the preclinical feasibility of mRNA-based therapeutics and vaccines was reported in
the 1990s, practical implementation of this approach only became possible over the past
decade. Early studies encountered major obstacles, including high innate immune reactivity
to foreign RNA, rapid degradation by RNases in body fluids, and inefficient in
vivo delivery to the translational machinery of host target
cells.15−19.

Pioneering work by Katalin Karikó and colleagues showed that exogenous RNA
stimulates innate immunity, in part through activation of endosomally localized Toll-like
receptors (TLRs, e.g., TLR3, TLR7, and TLR8), and that the immune
reactivity of RNA can be systematically down-modulated by incorporation of modified
nucleosides (e.g., m5C, m6A, m5U, s2U, or Ψ).17,20 Modified nucleosides increase both
the safety profile and the expression efficiency of mRNA delivered in vivo;
understanding this relationship was a critical step in advancing the technology to the
clinic.21,22 The
development of high-yield in vitro transcription systems for RNA
production, methods for increasing translation using synthetic 5′ cap analogues and
capping enzymes, and advances in template design and purification now facilitate rapid,
robust, and scalable manufacturing of mRNA.16,23−25.

Solutions to the remaining challenges of in vivo stability and delivery
emerged with the advent of nanotechnologies for encapsulating mRNA into virus-sized
(∼100 nm) cationic lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) that provide protection from
extracellular RNases while also facilitating uptake and endomosomal release of mRNA in
target cells.16,26
Intradermal, intramuscular, or subcutaneous delivery of mRNA, packaged in cationic LNPs,
results in prolonged antigen expression and the induction of B-cell and CD4+ T
follicular helper (TFH) cell responses that originate in the germinal centers of
secondary lymphoid organs. This outcome results in the production of potent and long-lived
antibody responses.27,28
In addition to CD4+ T-cells, mRNA vaccines also induce CD8+ T-cells
that recognize and kill antigen-expressing cells, including SARS-CoV-2 infected
cells.29−36.

The design, implementation, efficacy, and safety profiles of mRNA-based nanoparticle
vaccines expressing SARS-CoV-2 antigens, as exemplified by the COVID-19 vaccines recently
developed by Moderna Inc. and Pfizer/BioNTech, are discussed below. We also review
nano-enabled approaches for direct delivery of protein subunits, such as the Novavax
vaccine, as well as in silico designed, self-assembling nanoparticles that
mimic the virus display of the RBD. Table 1
provides a short list of the large number of contemporary and next-generation vaccines that
are currently entering or are already in clinical trials according to the World Health
Organization (WHO) COVID-19 vaccine database.37 In addition to discussing
nano-enabled platforms that either have received or are poised to obtain U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) approval (vide infra), we briefly discuss future
refinements, such as the development of nanoparticles that are capable of delivering
multiple epitopes or of promoting B- and T-cell cooperation in lymph node germinal centers.
Finally, challenges associated with vaccine durability, avoidance of vaccine side effects,
and adapting vaccine coverage to include SARS-CoV-2 escape mutants are discussed..

Efficacy data provided by the manufacturers upon completion of phase 3 clinical
trials, using heterogeneous criteria that included, in most instances, looking at
symptomatic infections but occasionally also considered serious infections and
mortality.183 Efficacy was also observed be impacted by viral
variants..

Approval denotes permissible use in some countries (which are not specified here).
Vaccines receiving emergency use authorization (EUA) in the United States are labeled
separately..

Antigen selection and composition are of key importance for vaccine development, in
addition to the choice of adjuvant and ensuring efficacious vaccine delivery to the
host’s innate and adaptive immune systems. The first vaccines to receive emergency
use authorization (EUA) from the FDA following successful completion of phase 3 clinical
studies are mRNA-delivering nanoparticles developed by Moderna, Inc. and
Pfizer/BioNTech.38−51 The selection and inclusion of the COVID-19 spike protein
as the preferred immunogen is premised on the observation that neutralizing antibodies to
the S glycoprotein of SARS-CoV-1 can prevent virus uptake by host cells by interfering in
ACE2 binding.4,9,52,53 The decision to use an mRNA source to express S
protein in host cells is based on the scalability of nucleic acid technology, enabling
billions of vaccine doses to be produced rapidly. The employment of nucleic acids, in turn,
necessitated nanoparticle construction to protect RNA from being degraded, while also
improving vaccine delivery to regional lymph nodes, where the expressed antigen is presented
to the cognate immune system by antigen-presenting cells (APCs).16
Nanoparticles also enable multicargo loading (e.g., antigens, epitopes,
adjuvants), with the added potential to include surface modifications
(e.g., targeting ligands or surface coatings) to facilitate lymph node and
germinal center access.21,28 These advantages contribute to the current trend of using nanoparticles
for vaccine delivery (e.g., the human papilloma virus vaccine), premised on
the preference of APCs for encapsulated particles compared to soluble
antigens.13,19,54−57 A wide variety of
materials such as lipids, liposomes, polymers, dendrimers, and self-assembled proteins can
be used for nanoparticle construction.25,39,58.

In addition to guiding the choice of antigen selection, the development of experimental
SARS-CoV-1 and MERS vaccines informed engineering of the RNA template to ensure high spike
protein expression and to obtain an antigen conformation that provides maximum
immunogenicity.5,6,59Figures 1 and 2 illustrate the
structural composition of the homotrimeric S protein, with two subunits (S1 and S2)
separated by a protease cleavage site.60 A key characteristic of the S1
subunits is that their RBDs can either assume an “up” or a
“down” conformation, with impact on spike immunogenicity.5−7,53,60−63 Upon release of virus particles from cells, the S1/S2
junction is cleaved by a host protease, furin (Figures 1 and 2).60 This cleavage causes a
conformational change that sequentially impacts one, two, and then all three RBDs to assume
a “stand up” conformation. ACE2 binding enables virus docking and fusion of
the virus with the mammalian cell membrane, a process requiring contraction of a fusion
peptide in the S2 subunit (Figure 2). The
three-dimensional (3D) conformation of the trimeric S protein when all RBD subunits are
standing up, also called a “pre-fusion” complex, is critical for viral uptake
as well as for exposing linear and conformational S1 epitopes required to generate
neutralizing antibodies.64−67 Not only is the spatial distribution of the B-cell epitopes
critical for spike protein cross-linking by neutralizing antibodies, but mutational
alteration of these binding sites could also play a role in decreased vaccine efficacy and
the possibility of immune escape by viral variants.68,69 We discuss this aspect further below..

Based on structural vaccinology considerations, a key design feature of SARS-CoV-2 vaccines
has been genetic engineering of the RNA constructs to enable S protein expression as a
prefusion complex.6,59
Mutational engineering was accomplished by eliminating the furin cleavage site plus
introducing two proline substitutions (referred to as “2-P”) in the S2 peptide
loop that is involved in the RBD stand-up conformation.6,59,70Figure 3 demonstrates attainment of a prefusion
conformation for the MERS S-2P trimer, which was significantly more immunogenic than the
monomeric S1 subunit in animal vaccination studies.6,20,71 Similar engineering
approaches for preserving neutralization-sensitive epitopes have also been accomplished for
other class I viral fusion proteins, such as RSV, HIV-1, and influenza. In addition to the
2-P mutational approach of Moderna Inc. and Pfizer/BioNTech, other approaches for achieving
antigen stabilization are possible, including substituting additional proline residues as
well as developing self-assembling nanoparticles with improved RBD
displays.70,72
Arcturus/Duke-NUS and Imperial College London/Acuitas24 have also
developed mRNA-delivering nanoparticles that have progressed to clinical trials (Table 2). Several other companies are pursuing similar
strategies..

Use of non-amplifying and self-amplifying mRNA (SAM) for expression of stabilized
prefusion S1 complexes for MERS, SARS-CoV-1, or SARS-CoV-2 in host cells. (A) mRNA
vaccines utilize non-amplifying or self-amplifying RNA constructs. Non-amplifying mRNA
contains the basic RNA structure as it appears in the viral open reading frame (ORF) for
S1.71 The major characteristics of nonreplicating mRNA vaccines are
(i) relatively small mRNA size (∼2–3 kb); (ii) absence of additional
potentially immunogenic viral proteins; (iii) ease of manufacturing; and (iv) facile
genetic engineering to accomplish stable antigen expression.71 In
contrast, SAM RNA encodes alphavirus replication machinery and 5′ capping
functions in addition to spike protein sequences. SAM vaccines increase antigen
expression for a duration of up to ∼2 months.71 On the
downside, the replicon is less amenable to tolerating RNA-stabilizing synthetic
nucleotide modifications and also expresses other viral proteins that may be
immunogenic. Reprinted with permission from ref (71). Copyright 2019 Elsevier. (B) RNA stability and gene expression are
enhanced by modifications of the mRNA cap, poly(A) tail, 5′ and 3′
untranslated regions (UTRs), and the nucleoside bases.207 Multiple
sequence elements are also engineered in the 5′ and 3′ UTRs to impact mRNA
stability and expression. In addition, nucleoside substitution of uridine with
pseudouridine or 1-methylpseudouridine impacts the stability and adjuvant properties of
the RNA. Reprinted with permission from ref (207). Image by V. Altounian/SCIENCE. Copyright 2020 AAAS. (C) Lipid
nanoparticle (LNP) construction and encapsulation are discussed in Figures 4 and 5.23
Reprinted with permission from ref (23).
Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (D) Encapsulated RNA is also engineered to include
two proline (2-P) substitutions plus elimination of the furin cleavage site to allow
expression of a stabilized prefusion complex. This feature allows the exposure of hidden
epitopes, which are required for a robust neutralizing antibody response. The schematic
shows the crystal structure and negative EM staining of a MERS S-2P complex.6 Reprinted with permission from ref (6). Copyright 2017 The Authors..

Abbreviations: PC, phosphatidylcholine; PEG, polyethylene glycol; RBD,
receptor-binding domain..

The RNA vaccines in Table 2 include the use of
non-amplifying or self-amplifying mRNA constructs.15,24,26,71,73 Whereas the Moderna vaccine delivers conventional single-stranded mRNA
for spike protein expression, the vaccines developed by Pfizer/Biontech, Arcturus, and
Imperial College include self-amplifying positive-sense RNA constructs that borrow
expression and replication elements from an alphavirus genome (Figure 3).71 The Imperial College vaccine uses a gene
sequence from the equine encephalitis alphavirus that encodes nonstructural proteins
assisting RNA capping and replication, and the Arcturas vaccine uses a self-transcribing and
replicating RNA (STARR) platform..

The upscale production of RNA constructs for nanoparticle encapsulation begins with
large-scale production of linearized plasmid DNA, using E. coli
fermentation or enzymatic processes such as doggybone.23,74 mRNA is produced from DNA templates in
bioreactors optimized for in vitro transcription by T7 RNA polymerase and
5′ RNA capping with 7-methylguanosine to ensure optimal antigen
expression.74,75
Following RNA synthesis, template DNA is digested by DNase I and RNA is purified by
tangential flow filtration (TFF) plus ion exchange chromatography to remove enzymes and
impurities. A second TFF process is used to provide a buffered aqueous RNA solution for
sterile filtration. In addition to engineering antigen stabilization, modified nucleosides
are used to increase construct stability and to tune immunological “danger
signals” (Figure 3).20−22,76 A frequently used approach is uridine
substitution by pseudouridine or 1-methyl pseudouridine.20,22 The delivery of danger signals plays an
important role in the self-adjuvanting properties of RNA vaccines, including generation of
pro-inflammatory responses.77 Modifications of 5′ and 3′
untranslated regions of mRNA constructs are also used to control stability and
expression..

To prevent RNA degradation before delivery to the host translational machinery, an
effective packaging system is required. This prerequisite can be accomplished by making use
of cationic lipid nanoparticles, which were originally developed for nucleic acid delivery
for cancer immunotherapy and other vaccine applications (Figure 4).16,19,23,73 The use of
cationic lipids effectively condenses mRNA into solid lipid nanoparticles that can be taken
up by host APCs through endocytic or phagosomal pathways.71 These
processing pathways also facilitate nucleic acid release into the cytoplasm, where the mRNA
is expressed.78 The packaging and encapsulation of mRNA was originally
developed by the use of ionizable, cationic lipids (such as
1,2-dioleoyl-3-dimethylammoniumpropane, DODAP) which exhibit a high binding affinity for
negatively charged RNA (Figure 5).23,78,79 In addition to DODAP, other lipids have been developed using a more
flexible hinge region to link amino-lipid head groups to hydrophobic lipid
tails.16,73,79−81 Examples include 1,2-dilinoleyloxy-3-dimethylaminopropane (DLinDMA) and
dilinoleylmethyl-4 dimethyl aminobutyrate (DLin-MC3-DMA), which, in the presence of
helper/structural lipids (e.g.,
1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycerol-3 phosphocholine, DSPC) and cholesterol, lead to
the formation of micellar structures in the presence of RNA.79−81 Finally, coating with poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG)-conjugated lipids
leads to the formation of nanoparticles with colloidal stability.82.

Lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) for the encapsulation and delivery of mRNA. RNA has
theoretical advantages over DNA delivery because the RNA payload only has to reach the
cytosol instead of making it to the nucleus. Moreover, RNA does not pose the danger of
integration into host genomes, is easier to manufacture, and is only transiently
expressed compared to DNA. Lipid nanoparticles differ from liposomes by the presence of
an electron-dense core that forms during complexation of cationic lipids to a nucleic
acid. Instead, liposomes are composed of a lipid bilayer with an aqueous
interior.71 LNP formulations are typically made up of (i) an
ionizable amino-lipid (discussed in Figure 5)
for electrostatic complexing to RNA (in red), leading to the formation of hydrophobic
inverted micelles; (ii) helper lipids providing structural components that stabilize
cell membranes, including zwitterionic lipids (e.g., DOPE) or DSPC;
(iii) cholesterol, promoting tight packaging of lipid components; and (iv) a glycol
(PEG)-lipid, which provides a surface hydrating layer that improves colloidal stability
with reduced protein adsorption.71 Reprinted with permission from ref
(23). Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons..

Role of cationic lipids in nucleic acid delivery nanoparticles. (A) Membrane lipids
normally adopt a cylindrical molecular shape, which accommodates their incorporation
into lipid bilayers of endosomal membranes.79 (B) However, when
cationic and anionic lipids are mixed together, ion pairs form a cross-sectional area in
which the head groups occupy a volume that is less than that of the lipid side chains,
which are splayed in cone-shaped fashion.79 This conformation is also
known as a hexagonal (HII) lipid phase, which has the capacity to interfere
with the lipid bilayer in endosomes upon contact with the LNP (Figure
6).78 (C) Ionizable amino-lipids are
characterized by a cationic head group, a linker, and hydrocarbon side chains. These
cationic lipids have acid dissociation constants (pKa) of
less than 7.0, conferring neutral charge at physiological pH (7.4) but converting to a
positive charge in acidified (pH <6.0) endosomal compartments.23
Ionizable amino-lipids with a linker group (such as in DLinDMA) serve a number of
purposes: (i) nucleic acid entrapment with high encapsulation efficiency; (ii)
maintenance of a neutral particle surface charge under physiological pH conditions, such
as in the interstitial and lymphatic fluids; (iii) endosomal escape under acidic,
intracellular conditions, as explained in Figure 6.23 (D,E) Planar lipid bilayer of the endosomal membrane
is composed mostly of anionic and helper lipids plus cholesterol, which differs from the
hexagonal lipid phase, displayed by the cationic lipid nanoparticles (also see Figure 6). A, B, and C reprinted with permission
from ref (79). Copyright 2010 Springer Nature. D
and E adapted with permission from ref (78) under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License. Copyright 2012 The
Authors..

In addition to their role in RNA complexation, cationic lipids also contribute to the
assembly of a hexagonal (HII) lipid phase in the nanoparticles (Figure 5).79,81 The hexagonal phase is the result of binding interactions between
cationic head groups and anionic bystander lipids. This phase leads to the formation of
cone-shaped lipid structures, in contrast to the more cylindrical lipid assembly found in
the planar lipid bilayers that compose endosomal membranes.79 Under
acidifying endosomal conditions, lipid exchanges take place between the particle
HII lipid phase and the endosomal membrane (Figure 6).78 The consequence of
mixing particle and endosomal membrane lipids is the release of mRNA into the cytosol. This
release may be assisted by an increase in hydrostatic pressure in the endosomal compartment
as a result of the cationic lipids turning on the proton pump, leading to an influx of
H+, Cl–, and H2O.78 Thus, the
efficacy of mRNA release is directly related to the pKa of the
cationic head group.79,83
Cationic head groups may also contribute to the generation of immune danger signals by TLRs
that are sensitive to surface charge..

RNA delivery to the cytosol. The prevailing hypothesis is that the hexagonal lipid
phase in nanoparticles within endosomes catalyzes lipid exchange that destabilizes the
composition of the anionic endosomal membrane.78 The suggested flow
of events is that lipid nanoparticle (LNP) entry into endosomes is followed by
electrostatic interaction of cationic, ionizable lipids in the LNP with the anionic
lipids in the endosomal membrane. This interaction leads to lipid exchange and fusion of
the particle with the endosomal lipid phase, followed by nucleic acid escape to the
cytoplasm, possibly assisted by the endosomal proton pump, which is activated by
cationic lipids. Every proton leads to the importation of a chloride and water molecule,
leading to increased hydrostatic pressure. Reprinted with permission from ref (78) under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution 3.0 License. Copyright 2012 The Authors..

Although LNP synthesis can be accomplished by sonicating lipid suspensions in a buffered
aqueous solution, efficient industrial-level synthesis of RNA nanoparticles is based on a
scaled-up process involving microfluidics mixing, as outlined in Figure
7.23 Mixing of the RNA-containing aqueous
phase with the ethanol-suspended lipid phase is accompanied by a progressive increase in
solvent polarity, which acts as a driver for nanoparticle assembly. Assembly commences with
the formation of hydrophobic inverted micelles when the cationic lipids are complexed to
negatively charged RNA. A further increase in solvent polarity leads to the coalescence of
lipid particle cores, followed by coating with PEGylated lipids and DSPC.23 The ultimate outcome is the formation of nanoparticles with electron-dense cores,
surrounded by a PEGylated lipid monolayer (Figure 4)..

Upscale synthesis process for manufacturing lipid nanoparticles (LNPs). (A)
Microfluidic process is premised on an ethanol injection approach, which leads to
precipitation of dissolved lipids when mixed with an aqueous solution in a microfluidic
device. In this example, the device is equipped with a staggered herringbone
micromixer.208 Reprinted with permission from ref (208) under a Creative Commons Attribution-Non
Commercial 3.0 Unported License. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (B,C)
Assembly of the nanoparticle components is driven by the increase in solvent polarity
with introduction of the aqueous phase.23 The first interaction
during the mixing of ethanol with the aqueous stream is binding of the cationic lipid
with the negatively charged nucleic acid to generate hydrophobic, inverted micelles.
With further increase in solvent polarity, the hydrophobic micelles coalesce into
nanoprecipitates that generate the LNP core. With continuous mixing, more polar lipids
(such as PEG-lipid and DSPC) coat the surface of the precipitates, resulting in
particles with electron-dense cores surrounded by a lipid monolayer.23 Reprinted with permission from ref (23).
Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons..

The premier delivery platforms for DNA leading to the expression of SARS-CoV-2 spike
protein are adenovirus-vectored vaccines, which fall outside the scope of this review (Table 1). Other examples of DNA delivery are the
vaccines being developed by Entos Pharmaceuticals, Mediphage Bioceuticals, Zydus Cadila, and
Inovio Pharmaceuticals.39,84,85 Entos Pharmaceuticals developed a proteolipid vesicle (PLV)
for nucleic acid delivery, premised on Fusogenix nucleic acid transfer technology.86 These neutral lipid vesicles display a proprietary fusion-associated small
transmembrane (FAST) protein that catalyzes lipid exchange between the PLV and the host cell
plasma membrane. This highly efficient fusion of the vesicle with the lipid membrane results
in delivery of the nucleic acid payload by a process that bypasses the endocytic route. To
date, leading CoV-2 vaccine candidates have shown robust efficacy and safety in preclinical
animal studies and have progressed to the clinical trial stage in humans. Utilizing a
Ministring platform comprising mini-linear DNA vectors that encode the gene of interest plus
eukaryotic expression elements (devoid of unwanted bacterial sequences), Mediphage
Bioceuticals has developed virus-like particles (VLPs) for delivery of SARS-CoV-2 DNA
sequences.87 This vaccine platform is in preclinical development..

In addition to nanoparticles, some companies have developed plasmid-based technologies for
electroporation-driven DNA delivery, with the prospect of providing SARS-CoV-2 vaccination
through the expression of a spike protein. This includes the “plug-and-play”
plasmid delivery platform (INO-4800) from Inovio Pharmaceuticals, which is injected
intradermally, followed by electroporation that involve the company’s CELLECTRA
device.84 To date, this vaccine effort has demonstrated efficacy and
safety in preclinical studies and has advanced to a phase 2 clinical trial in humans. Zydus
Cadila has also developed a DNA plasmid, ZyCoV-D, that has performed well in preclinical
studies and recently advanced to a phase 3 vaccine trial in humans..

An alternative approach to employing nanoparticles for CoV-2 vaccine development is to use
full-length spike protein or viral subunits for encapsulation or self-assembly into
nanoparticles. The value proposition of subunit vaccines is that nanoparticles enhance the
efficacy of cargo delivery to endosomal APC compartments, from which the proteolytically
cleaved peptides are transported to (i) the surface of APCs by vesicles containing type II
major histocompatibility complexes (MHC-II) and (ii) the cytosol, from where the peptides
are imported to vesicles that transport MHC-I complexes to the surface of most body
cells.88 As a result, MHC-I-mediated peptide presentation to
CD8+ T-cells is enabled, with the possibility of triggering the development of
cytotoxic T-cells that kill virus-infected cells. In contrast, antigen presentation by
MHC-II on APC surfaces leads to activation of different CD4+ lineages that will
be discussed later. The efficacy of subunit vaccines is boosted by the inclusion of
independent adjuvants into the nanoparticle..

The current front-runner for protein-based antigen presentation efforts is the Novavax
vaccine, which recently entered phase 3 clinical trials.39,61,89 NVX-CoV2373 is a
self-assembled nanoparticle vaccine derived from the recombinant expression of full-length S
protein by a Baclovirus expression system in moth cells (Figure 8).61 The expressed 2-P full-length S protein
spontaneously assembles as prefusion complexes in the presence of Sorbitol 80 to form free
trimers, dimers-of-trimers, trimers-of-trimers, or multitrimer rosettes (up to 14 trimers,
Figure 8). Tight clustering of the spike proteins
increases immunogenicity as demonstrated for other type I fusion proteins,
e.g., influenza hemagglutinin. The Novavax vaccine includes a proprietary
adjuvant, MatrixM,90 which consists of 40 nm honeycomb-like nanoparticles
derived from plant saponins, mixed with cholesterol and a phospholipid (Figure 8). A significant advantage of the NVX-CoV2373 formulation
is transportability and above-freezing storage temperatures (35–46 °F), compared
to the deep freeze requirements of the mRNA LNP vaccines..

COVID-19 vaccine development through self-assembly of stabilized, full-length
SARS-CoV-2 S subunits into nanoparticles. (A) Novavax developed a full-length S protein
subunit vaccine that is expressed as a stabilized protein with mutational deletion of
the furin cleavage site plus 2 proline (2-P) substitutions (K986P and V987P) that confer
an “RBD-up” conformation.61 This leads to expression of
SARS-CoV-2 3Q-2P spike protein as a prefusion complex. When reconstituted in polysorbate
80 (PS 80), the protein adopts tertiary structures that include free trimers,
dimers-of-trimers, trimers-of-trimers or multitrimer rosettes (with as many as 14 trimer
transmembrane domains being enclosed in micellar PS 80 cores).61
Moreover, the vaccine is further reconstituted with the Matrix-M adjuvant. Reprinted
with permission from ref (61). Copyright 2020
AAAS. (B) Negative stain electron microscopy of the full-length spike (reconstituted in
PS 80), admixed with the cage-like Matrix-M component (from plant
origin).61,209
The spike rosettes are circled in yellow, and Matrix-M adjuvant cages are circled in
white.90 The imaging confirms the presence of trimeric spike as
free trimers or as multitrimer rosettes. Matrix-M does not appear to interact with the
spike nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref (209). Copyright 2020 AAAS..

An elegant demonstration of the use of protein self-assembly to generate a SARS-CoV-2
vaccine was provided by Walls et al., who constructed a self-assembling
nanoparticle that mimics RBD expression on the viral surface (Figure 9).72 Using a structure-based in
silico design, a two-component nanoparticle was derived through the self-assembly
of 60 RBD fusion protein subunits on the exterior surface of an icosahedral subunit,
obtained by self-assembly of 120 computer designed components (panel B). The multivalent
display of RBD subunits enabled generation of neutralizing antibody levels that were 10
times greater than antibody titers obtained with stabilized spike complexes, delivered at a
5-fold higher dose to animals.72 It is tempting to speculate that
multivalent display of RBD subunits instructs the development of highly effective
neutralizing antibodies capable of cross-linking spike proteins on the SARS-CoV-2 surface.
The scalability of this platform introduces a further variation of structure-based vaccine
design to be considered in future vaccine efforts..

Self-assembly of an in silico-designed nanoparticle protein vaccine
that displays the receptor-binding domain (RBD) as a highly immunogenic array that
mimics natural virus structure. (A) Utilizing a structure-based in
silico vaccine design approach, a self-assembling protein nanoparticle
vaccine with resemblance of viral morphology was developed.72 Each
particle is composed of two components, an icosahedral 120 subunit core (153–50B)
that supports binding to 60 SARS-CoV-2 RBD domains (RBD-153–50A), conjugated to a
153–50B-interactive domain. (B) Nanoparticles roughly resemble a virus, which may
account for their enhanced ability to provoke a diverse, highly potent, and protective
antibody responses during animal testing.72 The lead nanoparticle
vaccine candidate is being manufactured for clinical trials. Reprinted with permission
from ref (72) under a Creative Commons CC-BY
license. Copyright 2020 Elsevier..

In addition to Novavax, Sanofi Pasteur/GSK, Vaxine, and Clover
Biopharmaceuticals/GSK/Dynavax are engaged in SARS-CoV-2 subunit vaccine efforts that have
progressed to phase 1 clinical trials. These vaccines make use of adjuvants developed by
GSK, Dynavax, and Vaxine. The GSK adjuvant (AS03) is composed of α-squalene and
polysorbate 80 in an oil-in-water emulsion,91 while the Dynavax adjuvant
(CpG 1018)92 consists of a 22-mer oligonucleotide that interacts with
TLR9. The Vaxine adjuvant (Advax) is a microparticle composed of delta-inulin
polysaccharides.93 Adjuvant choice is important in instructing the type
of helper T-cell responses that are key to the attainment of vaccine efficacy and safety, as
discussed below..

An alternative approach for developing subunit vaccines is to use VLPs, which are
constructed by the self-assembly of capsid proteins from mammalian, insect, or plant
viruses.39,58,94,95 The production of VLPs is accomplished by
fermentation processes or the use of molecular farming techniques. Medicago96 and iBio/CC-Pharming97 produce tobacco plant virus
particles that include the CoV-2 S protein, and AdaptVac uses their ExpreS2ion vector for
expressing the S2 subunit in insect cells.98 The Medicago vaccine, which
utilizes the GSK adjuvant, has entered clinical trials, while the iBio/CC-Pharming and
AdaptVac VLPs are in preclinical development (Table 1)..

Another vaccine category making progress is epitope-based vaccines, which could rely on
nanoparticle delivery of individual or epitope combinations. Currently, the primary goals of
these particles are to enhance T-cell responses and to obtain improved cooperation between
T- and B-cells for boosting the production of neutralizing antibodies.3,30,85,99−105 Peptide-based vaccines hold several advantages
over conventional subunit vaccines, including low production cost, no need for microbial
cultures, high specificity, high stability, and easy scalability. On the downside, the
genetic variation of the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) allele gene pool in the population
could mean that individual T-cell epitopes are not equally effective in every person,
necessitating selection tools to identify promiscuous epitopes for MHC-II presentation to
CD4+ T-cells or for MHC-I presentation to CD8+
T-cells.3,30,64,99,103 The ability to design new
peptide-based vaccines has received a major boost from the availability of epitope-mapping
tools such as the immune epitope database (IEDB) for predicting B- and T-cell epitope
sequences (Table 3).106,107 In addition, a number of
immunoinformatics approaches have emerged to facilitate the prediction-making process for
multiepitope vaccine design,30,64,65,94,100,102,104,108 including
computational tools that predict epitope binding to diverse HLA alleles
(e.g., the IEDB population coverage tool).107 It is
also possible to use HLA ligandome analysis for calculating the probability of peptide
interactions with consensus motifs, including 3D predictions for viral peptide docking to
cytokine-inducing receptors (e.g., TLR2 and TLR4).65,109 Molecular dynamics simulations are
used for molecular in silico predictions of vaccine antigenicity (Table 3).109 Collectively, these
tools now enable multiepitope vaccine design to test the feasibility of obtaining
cooperative B- and T-cell interactions, as well as possibly soliciting specific
CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell responses (discussed in a later
section).30,64,65,102,104,108,110.

Abbreviations: HLA, human leukocyte antigen; TLR, Toll-like receptor..

Although several peptide vaccines have been constructed and are in preclinical development,
comparatively few CoV-2 peptide vaccines have advanced to the clinical stage. One example is
EpiVacCorona, which was developed in Russia and is composed of synthesized SARS-CoV-2
peptide antigens, conjugated to a protein carrier that is adsorbed onto an
aluminum-containing adjuvant.111 This vaccine has advanced to phase 1 and
2 clinical trials and has demonstrated the ability to induce protective immunity following
intramuscular injection. The second example is a peptide vaccine (UB-612) developed by
COVAXX plus United Biomedical that has entered phase 2 and 3 clinical trials.112 UB-612 is composed of eight components and was designed to induce a
combination of neutralizing antibodies plus T-cell responsivity through the inclusion of a
S1-RBD-sFc fusion protein, six synthetic peptides (one universal plus 5 SARS-CoV-2-derived
peptides), a proprietary CpG oligonucleotide (TLR-9 binding agonist), and an aluminum
phosphate adjuvant. Vaccination studies in guinea pigs and rats demonstrated the generation
of high titers of neutralizing antibodies against S1-RBD, robust cellular immunity, and TH1
skewing of the immune response. Subsequent challenge studies in a non-human primate animal
model confirmed disease prevention and reduction of viral load. The third example is the
development of the IMP-CoVac-1 vaccine by IMV Inc., which has entered a phase 1 clinical
trial.113 This vaccine is based on the use of a lipid-based DPX
platform that can be formulated with peptide antigens, which are capable of activating B-
and T-cell responses. The vaccine can be stored for extended time periods in a dry form and
is easy to reconstitute for injection. In addition to these examples, new vaccine products
that are in preclinical development include a vaccine by Oncogen that incorporates synthetic
peptides that mimic S and M protein epitopes,25,114 a vaccine by Vaxil Corporation that utilizes a signal
peptide technology, an adjuvanted microspheric peptide platform by FlowVax, and the Ii-Key
hybrid peptide platform developed by EpiVax Inc. in collaboration with Generex Biotechnology
Corp.113.

Despite being the first of their kind, the RNA vaccines developed by Pfizer/BioNTech and
Moderna represent the fastest vaccine development attempts ever, replacing the previous
record of 4 years held by the mumps vaccine. In addition to the authorization of these
vaccines by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the Arcturas Therapeutics and
Imperial College vaccines are poised to advance to phase 3 clinical trials at the time of
writing of this Perspective (Table 2)..

Prior to commencing human clinical trials, the antigen-specificity and immunogenicity of
mRNA vaccine candidates were confirmed by animal studies, which demonstrated that
dose-dependent neutralizing antibody responses to the S protein are capable of reducing lung
infection and viral loads of mouse-adapted SARS-CoV-2 strains.38,40,44,47,115 Moreover, antibody subclasses recognizing the S protein
showed dominance of the IgG2a subclass over IgG1, which is an indirect reflection of the
differential triggering of T-helper 1 cell (TH1) versus T-helper 2 cell
(TH2) immune responses.44 Whereas TH1 cells facilitate IgG2a class
switching, TH2 cells favor IgG1 class switching. This notion was corroborated by the
dominance of IFN-γ versus IL-4 production by splenocytes from
immunized animals; IFN-γ is produced by TH1 cells, while IL-4 is produced by TH2
cells.44 The importance of obtaining TH1 dominance is important for the
prevention of side effects, as observed for MERS and SARS-CoV1 vaccines. Additional
preclinical studies in non-human primates confirmed the generation of high titers of
neutralizing antibodies capable of preventing SARS-CoV-2 infection in the upper and lower
respiratory tracts.38,47
These studies also assisted in dosimetry development and demonstrating that the
intramuscular route of administration generates sufficient inflammatory effects to assist
the recruitment of APCs and antigen presentation in regional lymph
nodes.21,116,117.

In addition to the success of the FDA-approved vaccines, Arcturus (ARCT-021) demonstrated
effective induction of protective antibody levels in primates after a single injection of
the mRNA-delivering LNP.118 Interestingly, this vaccine also provided
protection to immune-deficient animals that were depleted of B-cells but not to mice
depleted of CD8+ T-cells, demonstrating the independent contribution of cellular
immunity in preventing SARS-CoV-2 infection.118.

The success of first-generation vaccines in preclinical studies was duplicated by
observations of protective immunity in human clinical trials, which have been extensively
reviewed elsewhere (Table 2).38,40−43,45−47,50,119 In brief, all mRNA vaccines
subjected to large-scale clinical trials have proven to be effective in generating high
protective antibody titers against the S protein and its RBD in humans. In fact, the IgG
titers to RBD or the S protein are frequently higher than antibody titers in convalescent
sera of subjects recovering from natural COVID-19 infections. In addition, humoral immune
responses were generally accompanied by evidence of CD4+- and
CD8+-mediated T-cell immunity, including evidence of a TH1 skewed immune response
(e.g., IFN-γ production). An unprecedented milestone was the
demonstration that two rounds of intramuscular injection with the Moderna and
Pfizer/BioNTech vaccines were ∼95% effective in preventing symptomatic disease (Table 2). A recent non-peer-reviewed update from
Arcturus also demonstrated favorable immunogenicity and tolerability in phase 1 and 2 human
studies, with all vaccinated subjects showing high antibody titers.118.

Preclinical studies with the Novavax vaccine in mice and non-human primates also
demonstrated the generation of high SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibodies, along with strong B-
and T-cell responses.61,89 Subsequent phase 1 and 2 clinical trials confirmed the generation of
vaccine-induced antibody titers that exceed the immunoglobulin titers after natural
infections.120 The vaccine has recently entered phase 3 clinical
trials..

Among VLPs, the Medicago vaccine has entered phase 2/3 clinical trials, while the
iBio/CC-Pharming and AdaptVac VLPs are still in preclinical development (Table 1).96,97 Medicago recently reported unpublished data indicating that 100% of
human test subjects receiving the adjuvanted vaccine develop protective humoral and cellular
immunity after two doses.96.

All considered, the above data are indicative of a high success rate for CoV-2 RNA and
subunit vaccines, now allowing comparisons of vaccine-induced versus
natural immunity. We can now test the hypothesis that the generation of immunity against the
spike protein may suffice in achieving herd immunity and be capable of bringing the pandemic
under control. To succeed, the current vaccine drive has to overcome the logistic challenges
of vaccinating a sufficient number of people to reach this level of protection. It is also
urgent to complete this task in as short a time interval as possible to control the global
viral burden, which contributes to the generation of potential immune escape viral
variants..

A key consideration for COVID-19 vaccine development is safety, with an emphasis on
avoiding adverse outcomes encountered during experimental MERS and SARS-CoV-1 vaccination
studies.47,50,95,115,121−124 These studies demonstrated two major adverse response
categories, namely, (i) antibody-mediated disease enhancement (ADE) and (ii) the occurrence
of a skewed cellular immune response in which eosinophil recruitment resulted in severe lung
damage at the time of viral challenge in vaccinated animals.122
Eosinophil lung damage was also observed during development of the RSV vaccine (which
includes a type I fusion protein) in humans.95,115,121,125,126 The basis for ADE was ascribed to a non-neutralizing antibody response
to MERS and SARS-CoV-1, which, instead of interfering in viral uptake, was accompanied by
accelerated Fcγ-mediated uptake of antibody-bound viral particles by host phagocytic
cells.122,127 As a
result, the internalized virus triggered innate immune responses that led to pathological
levels of cytokine and chemokine production. In contrast, eosinophil-mediated lung damage
was ascribed to the development of an unbalanced TH2-mediated immune response, which is
characterized by IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 production, leading to eosinophil recruitment and
lung damage.95,128,129 TH2 skewing of the immune response also favors IgG1 class
switching by IL-4. Postulated reasons for the TH2 skewing of immune responses by some MERS
or SARS-CoV-1 vaccines include antigen selection and the use of TH2 adjuvants
(e.g., alum).123,129.

The take-home message from prior vaccine efforts was to focus on the use of the spike
protein or subunits as the major immunogenic target, plus the use of TH1-skewing
adjuvants.93,123 In
addition to relying on the intrinsic adjuvant properties of the RNA in nucleic acid
vaccines, independent adjuvant use was introduced during development of VLP and subunit
vaccines (e.g., MatrixM, Advax, the GSK adjuvants, STING agonists).124 The TH1-skewing effects of mRNA vaccines were confirmed by phase 1 (safety)
clinical trials in humans.40,45 Clinical trials demonstrated that leukocytes from vaccinated human
subjects predominantly produce TH1 (e.g., INF-γ, IL-2, TNF) compared
to TH2 (e.g., IL-4, IL-13) cytokines. Moreover, no evidence for ADE or
eosinophilic immunopathology were observed in phase 3 studies. When side effects did occur
following administration of the Moderna or Pfizer vaccines, they were predominantly
characterized by mild or moderate symptoms.29,40 The most frequently experienced side effects were localized
pain at the injection site, occasional low-grade muscle and joint pain, fatigue, headaches,
fever, and chills. Ultimately, their combined safety features plus the demonstration of
∼95% efficacy in the clinical trials led to the Moderna and Pfizer/BioNTech vaccines
obtaining EUA from the FDA.46.

Although mild to moderate side effects continue to be the predominant experience during
population vaccination efforts, a handful of subjects have reported more serious allergic
side effects,130−133 such as the development of anaphylaxis, characterized by a
severe drop in blood pressure, breathing problems, wheezing, and tissue swelling. This
condition was infrequently observed in earlier clinical safety studies, which excluded
people with serious allergic disorders from participating. Although the exact cause of the
anaphylaxis is still a matter of debate, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) advises people with a severe allergic reaction to ingredients in the RNA vaccine not
to take the injection.134 This recommendation includes not taking a
second vaccine dose if there was a severe allergic reaction to the first dose. People who
experience immediate allergic reactions to any other vaccine or injectable therapeutics are
advised to seek medical attention before considering vaccine administration. In contrast,
the CDC recommends that people who experience severe allergic reactions not related to
vaccines or injectable medications (e.g., environmental, food, pet, or
latex allergies) get vaccinated. The same advice applies to people with a history of
allergies to oral medications or a family history of severe allergies.130.

In considering possible ingredients that may contribute to anaphylactoid RNA vaccine
responses, a potential role for PEG has been noted.130 Poly(ethylene
glycol) is often used for coating nanoparticle surfaces to provide colloidal stability.
Different molecular weight PEGs are also used as softeners or moisture carriers in consumer
products such as toothpaste and shampoo and may also be included in biopharmaceuticals and
laxatives. Although it has been documented that PEG is capable of generating IgM or IgG
antibody responses that may lead to complement activation at the particle surface, an
alternative opinion is that PEGylated nanoparticles (e.g., Doxil) may
trigger a nonspecific complement activation-related pseudoallergic (CARPA) disorder.131 Yet another twist to the story is the discovery of IgE antibodies to PEG or
PEGylated drugs that may play roles in anaphylaxis. However, there is also a group of
experts who doubt that PEG is involved in anaphylaxis because of its low content in RNA
vaccines.133.

The best practical approach for at-risk people is to follow the CDC guidelines. It is also
recommended that all subjects receiving the vaccine wait 30 min after administration to
monitor severe side effects, which usually occurs within the first 15 min. Although it is
possible to develop serological screening assays to detect PEG antibodies, the best advice
for at-risk people not able to take RNA vaccines is to consider an alternative vaccine
formulation that excludes PEG. If no alternative is available, it is theoretically possible
to use a prophylactic cocktail composed of injectable H1 and H2 histamine receptor blockers
plus dexamethasone to reduce the severity of the adverse responses, such as used for people
with severe reactions to radiocontrast media.132 However, this strategy
would require consultation with an allergist and performance of the procedure in an
appropriate healthcare setting..

How long does the protective immune response to COVID-19 last? The current expectation is
that neutralizing antibody responses to spike protein will be of sufficient duration to
bring the pandemic under control by providing herd immunity. Although there is good evidence
that front-runner nucleic acid, subunit, and viral-vectored vaccines provide protective
immunity against COVID-19 that lasts for at least 8 months, we are uncertain about the
longer-term duration and completeness of the neutralizing antibody
response.41,43 To
address this question, we briefly review what is known about the development of protective
immunity after coronavirus infections. The neutralizing antibody response to seasonal
(“cold”) coronaviruses is of transient duration, allowing the occurrence of
reinfections.33 In contrast, the protective antibody responses to
SARS-CoV-1 and MERS lasted a minimum of 2–3 years after recovery. The current
observation period has been insufficient for the evaluation of vaccine durability against
SARS-CoV-2, but early studies performed on convalescent patient sera provide some clues. One
study calculated the half-life of anti-RBD antibody decline to be ∼36 days;135 however, other studies failed to observe a decline over observation periods
of 4–7 months.136,137 These variations could reflect differences in the severity of infection
because it has been demonstrated that people with milder infections generate lower antibody
titers that decline more rapidly.138 Severity of infection may also
explain why the more virulent SARS-CoV-1 and MERS viruses generated more durable
immunity..

Longitudinal studies to determine the duration of the protective response after natural
infection or vaccination are ongoing and of great importance for establishing future public
health policies. An early predictor of what may happen comes from a comprehensive study
looking at SARS-CoV-2 specific CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell responses as well
as antibody levels in a cohort of 188 individuals over a time period of 8 months.139 This cohort includes people with a variety of disease severities, ranging
from mild to severe, as typically observed across the United States. Neutralizing IgG
antibody titers against the spike protein and RBD remained relatively stable, with only a
modest decline over 6–8 months. Spike-specific memory B-cells increased during this
time span, whereas memory CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells declined with
estimated half-lives of 3–5 months. The decay kinetics of memory T-cell responses
after COVID-19 are similar to the vaccination response to the yellow fever virus, which is
known to confer long-lasting immunity.29 Although precise correlates of
protection against secondary SARS-CoV-2 infection and disease are unknown, the presence of
durable cellular and humoral responses in the majority of subjects being studied over 8
months suggests that most individuals recovering from COVID-19 will have significant
protection against further disease. These findings are further strengthened by the
observations of Peng et al., who recently noted that disease severity may
determine the type of T-cell response.31 Thus, whereas activated
CD8+ T-cells tended to dominate in mild infections, CD4+ T-cells
dominated after severe infections. Moreover, Grifoni et al. demonstrated
good correlation between the appearance of spike-specific T-cells and antibody
responses.140.

How do CD4+ T-cells contribute to the generation of durable humoral immunity,
and how can this cooperation be exploited during vaccine development? To get to the bottom
of this question, it is important to understand how B-cells are activated in a
microanatomical lymph node compartment known as the germinal center. Here, a memory
CD4+ subset, known as follicular helper T-cells (TFH) cells,
cooperates with germinal center B-cells to improve their survival, proliferation,
immunoglobulin-class-switching ability, and somatic hypermutation (Figure
10A).21,28,141 This improvement culminates in the production
of antibodies with high diversity and affinity by B-cell precursors that ultimately
differentiate into plasma cells and long-lived memory B-cells. Moreover, it has been
demonstrated that there is a critical requirement for TFH cooperation with
germinal center B-cells in the development of durable immunity to polio, smallpox, and other
viral vaccines. Similar cooperativity is likely required for effective COVID-19 vaccination,
as indicated by a post mortem study conducted by Kaneko et
al. in 15 SARS-CoV-2 infected subjects succumbing to serious disease with high
viral loads.27 Of particular significance, there was a severe disruption
of thoracic lymph node architecture, compared to 29 age-matched controls succumbing to
non-COVID-19-related causes (Figure 10). Not only
did the COVID cases demonstrate a ∼70% decline in circulating B- and T-cells, but
histological analysis backed by immunohistochemistry staining demonstrated comparable
reduction in the number of germinal center B-cells and accompanying Bcl-6+
TFH cells.27 These findings are in agreement with the low
levels of somatic hypermutation in 403 monoclonal antibodies that were developed from
B-cells recovered from the blood of convalescent subjects by Brouwer et
al.(142).

Lymph node germinal centers—key to memory B-cell development—are
disrupted by COVID-19. (A) Naïve CD4+ T-cells are activated in
the T-cell zone by antigen-presenting dendritic cells.141 This
includes the generation of follicular helper T lymphocytes (TFH), which
upregulate CXC-chemokine receptor 5 (CXCR5) expression before activating B-cells at the
T–B border. Both cell types migrate to B-cell follicles to form germinal
centers.141 Active cooperation of TFH with germinal
center B-cells promotes immunoglobulin hypermutation, class switching, and affinity
maturation, during which B-cells differentiate into memory cells and long-lived plasma
cells (FDC, follicle dendritic cell; BCR, B-cell receptor; MHC, major histocompatibility
complex; TCR, T-cell receptor). Reprinted with permission from ref (141) under a Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) License. Copyright 2014 The Authors. (B)
Acutely ill COVID-19 patients carrying high viral loads exhibit a striking absence of
germinal centers, with a marked reduction of germinal center B-cells and TFH
cells.27,210
Although there is robust activation of nongerminal center B-cells, this does not give
rise to long-lived memory B-cells or the production of high affinity antibodies.
Reprinted with permission from ref (27).
Copyright 2020 Elsevier..

Are germinal centers involved in the development of antibody responses induced by
SARS-CoV-2 vaccination? During the use of mRNA delivering vaccines against Zika virus,
influenza hemagglutinin, and HIV-Env in mice and primates, Pardi et al.
demonstrated that administered lipid nanoparticles induce robust cooperation of
TFH cells with germinal center B-cells.21,143,144 Similar effects were
observed during the vaccination of rhesus macaques against influenza by Lindgren et
al., who also used nucleic-acid-carrying nanoparticles that could improve
antibody production in lymph node germinal centers.145 These findings
suggest that the same impact may be achieved by mRNA-delivering LNPs during SARS-CoV-2
vaccination. Should that not be the case, a promising approach for augmenting memory B-cell
responses in COVID-19 could be to develop vaccinating nanoparticles that improve antibody
production in germinal centers. An example of how that might be accomplished is depicted in
Figure 11, in which HIV-gp120 was encapsulated
in self-assembling nanoparticles that form during the polymerization of a highly
glycosylated bacterial protein, conjugated to a gp120 fusion protein.146
Following intravenous (IV) injection of these glycan-rich nanoparticles, the polysaccharide
ligands on the particle surface were shown to bind to manose-binding protein present in host
serum, which led to complement activation and, subsequently, particle recruitment to
germinal centers. As a consequence, a high titer of neutralizing antibodies was generated to
the encapsulated, compared to the monomeric, antigen. Similar success was achieved by
glycosylated nanoparticles delivering an HIV-gp160 (Env) trimer as well as influenza
hemagglutinin.146 These findings suggest that the level of particle or
antigen glycosylation could be a means of boosting the durability of neutralizing antibody
responses by vaccines. Additional approaches for improving humoral immunity through the
creative design of lymph node targeting nanoparticles were recently reviewed by Irvine and
Read.147.

Use of nanoparticle glycosylation to target lymph node germinal centers. Particulate
HIV immunogens are more capable of activating low-affinity germline precursor B-cells
than monomeric antigens, in addition to promoting TFH cooperation with
germinal center B-cells.146 This capability can be used for
nano-enabled enhancement of neutralizing antibody responses. (A) Engineered outer domain
(eOD) of the soluble HIV-gp120 monomer was formulated into ∼32 nm nanoparticles
by fusion to a glycan-rich bacterial protein, lumazine synthase, which self-assembles
into a 60-mer (eOD-60mer).146 (B) Confocal microscopy of a lymph node
showing that soluble monomers enter the subcapsular sinus of the lymph node but do not
gain access to germinal centers (darker blue). During challenge with monomers, the
centers exhibit sparse follicular dendritic cells (FDC) (lighter blue) and B-cells
(green). However, administration of the eOD-60mer demonstrates access to the germinal
center, loaded with FDC and B-cells.146 The mechanism of germinal
center recruitment has been ascribed to glycans on the particle surface binding to
mannose-binding protein. This signal triggers complement activation, which supports
polymerized antigen access to the germinal center.146 (C)
Quantitative expression of the number of TFH and B cells in the germinal
centers. Reprinted with permission from ref (146). Copyright 2019 AAAS..

Although initial efforts focused on achieving protection by generating neutralizing
antibodies, a challenge for COVID-19 vaccine developers is uncertainty about the
immunological correlates of vaccine efficiency.148 Do we evaluate
immunological biomarkers (e.g., antibody titers), absence of symptomatic
infections, decline in hospitalization, or decreased mortality rates? Although contemporary
vaccine trials suggest that IgG levels provide a good proxy for vaccine efficacy, we know
that neutralizing antibodies do not provide viral clearance from infected sites. Viral
clearance requires the participation of cytotoxic CD8+ T-cells as well as the
cooperation of CD4+ T-cells. A key question from a vaccination perspective,
therefore, becomes to what extent do we rely on the sterilizing effects of antibodies as
compared to the additional contribution of T-cells, including providing long-term efficacy?
Not only do activated CD4+ and cytotoxic CD8+ T-cells play critical
roles in defense against acute viral infections, but evidence has been collected during mild
or asymptomatic infections that show the appearance of T-cells in the absence of significant
antibody production (e.g., the appearance of T-cells in the circulation of
sero-negative family members exposed to COVID-19).149,150 In addition, epitope-mapping studies have shown
the appearance of cross-reactive T-cell responses to the spike or membrane (M) proteins in a
total of 28% of healthy blood donors before the onset of the pandemic.149
This result highlights the possibility that nonspike proteins could play an important role
in cross-reactive immunity to multiple coronaviruses, a finding that is further corroborated
by the detection of cross-reactive T-cells in 20–50% of uninfected people in
high-impact COVID-19 communities.151.

Although there is good evidence for T-cell involvement in the vaccine response to mRNA,
protein subunit, and viral-vectored CoV-2 vaccines, it is becoming clear that the roles of
T-cells require additional consideration for future vaccine development. Of particular
interest is determining if there are differences in T-cell phenotypes stimulated by
different vaccine types, with the possibility that there could be complementarity of action
by combining current vaccines (e.g., adenovirus-vectored with mRNA
vaccines).152 A more deliberate future attempt would be to exploit
nano-enabled design features to improve T–B cooperation. In addition to the
principles explained in Figures 10 and 11, another approach would be to develop a multiepitope vaccine strategy, such
as the “string-of-beads vaccines” (SBV) concept, previously used for
cytomegalovirus and influenza (Figure 12A).110,153,154 This strategy could entail the selection and combination
of epitopes from diverse SARS-CoV-2 antigens (M, N, E, and S proteins) that are spliced
together with the assistance of cleavable spacer sequences.110 Similar
outcomes can also be achieved by the design of DNA or RNA minigenes, as demonstrated by
Fomsgaard et al. for influenza.154 The selection of
potentially synergistic epitope combinations will benefit from the use immunoinformatics
tools, as described above.65,94,99,100,102,104,109 This approach could include the use of tools
that enable the design of appropriate linker and codon adjustment strategies for minigene
design.64,102
Ultimately, it should be possible to use suitably designed nanocarriers to deliver
multiepitope peptide sequences or minigene nucleic acid constructs to the host immune system
for antigen presentation. Vaccine efficiency will depend on epitope selection as well as the
correct choice of spacers to enable epitope release by the immunoproteosome.110.

String-of-beads vaccines (SBVs) for multiepitope delivery. (A) Concept of SBVs for
infectious disease agents (e.g., influenza and cytomegalovirus) is
based on expressing multiple epitopes from pathogen antigens separated by cleavable
spacers.110 It is envisaged that the design tools for the selection
of multiple epitopes and their encapsulation in suitable nanocarriers will facilitate
SARS-CoV-2 epitope delivery to regional lymph nodes, where individual epitopes will be
released by proteolytic processing and presented by dendritic cells. Vaccine efficiency
would depend on the optimal combination of B- and T-cell epitopes as well as the use of
appropriate spacers to allow efficient epitope release.110 Reprinted
with permission from ref (110) under the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Copyright 2016 Springer Nature. (B)
Multiepitope vaccines have received a boost from new immunoinformatic tools for vaccine
design, using a series of prediction tools as outlined in Table 3. In this example, Yarmarkovich et al. report
the design of multiepitope vaccines that deliver 65 × 33-mer SARS-CoV-2 peptides,
making use of the following guidelines: (i) selection of peptide sequences from 15
related coronaviruses; (ii) epitope ability to activate CD4+ and
CD8+ T-cells by enabling interactions with diverse HLA gene sequences;
(iii) B-cell activation by linear and conformational epitope sequences; (iv) high
immunogenicity through sequence selection that is significantly dissimilar to the
self-proteome; (v) vaccine safety.109 Reprinted with permission from
ref (109) under the Creative Commons License
CC-BY 4.0. Copyright 2020 The Authors..

An example of multiepitope vaccine design, aiming for durable immunity through a
combination of B- and T-cell epitopes, was recently demonstrated by Yarmarkovich et
al.(109) These investigators developed 65 × 33mer-peptides
using the design principles outlined in Figure 12B. Epitope selections included evolutionarily conserved coronavirus sequences,
including T-cell epitopes for population-based HLA coverage, in addition to the inclusion of
linear and conformational B-cell epitopes. To maximize immunogenicity, only viral regions
with the highest degree of dissimilarity to the human immunopeptidome were chosen. This
vaccine design also enables conjugated TH1 adjuvants to be included with the peptides.
Although the efficacy of this design still awaits animal experimentation, we have outlined
the success that was achieved by COVAXX using their eight-component multiepitope vaccine
(UB-612) to induce protective immune responses in rats, guinea pigs, and a non-human primate
model.112.

Multiepitope vaccine design could also enable the generation of cross-reactive immunity
that deliberately expands the contribution of different types of memory T-cells.155 The feasibility of this approach is supported by a number of studies
showing broad-based T-cell reactivity in 20–50% of people with no known exposure to
SARS-CoV-2.151 Memory T-cells can be classified as central memory,
effector memory, and tissue-resident (TRM) memory T-cells, which can be expressed
as CD4+ and CD8+ phenotypes.156,157 Lipsitch et al. recently
conducted a thought experiment that considers multiple scenarios of how cross-reactive
CD4+ memory T-cells may impact the development of SARS-CoV-2 transmission and
herd immunity.155 In one hypothetical scenario, cross-reactive memory
TFH cells were projected to participate in triggering more robust and rapid
neutralizing antibody responses that reduce the magnitude and duration of symptomatic
SARS-CoV-2 infections. This outcome was projected to enhance the durability of the immune
response but to exert little effect on viral loads in the respiratory tract. This scenario
was also postulated to lead to fewer hospitalizations and deaths, with a moderate impact on
viral spread.155 A second scenario envisages a role for cross-reactive
TRM cells that have the inherent capacity to induce rapid control of virus
spread in the respiratory tract through their ability to recruit cytotoxic T-cells,
resulting in rapid clearance from virally infected cells as a result of the failure of the
sterilizing antibody defense.155 Thus, this form of T-cell memory could
allay the development of severe disease at the time of re-exposure, leading to short
asymptomatic infectious episodes with low viral loads. However, this immune response would
be launched at the expense of generating durable memory responses. Although this thought
experiment still needs to be experimentally tested, a key question now becomes whether it is
possible through epitope selections and use of appropriate adjuvants to engage and activate
specific memory phenotypes selectively in vaccine development? Although there is currently
no answer to this question, it is tempting to speculate that future vaccine development
efforts will be able to exploit the early surveillance role of TRM cells to boost
neutralizing antibody defenses against SARS-CoV-2.156,157 Along similar lines, it may also be possible to
select cross-reactive coronavirus regions to generate long-lived memory T-cells to develop a
pan-coronavirus vaccine..

There is presently great concern about the ability of COVID-19 vaccines to protect against
viral variants that have emerged in the United Kingdom (UK), South Africa, and
Brazil.158 Replication of the 29.9 kb single-stranded positive-sense
RNA genome of SARS-CoV-2 requires the production of negative strand complementary RNA
templates, which are copied into positive stranded viral genomes. In all cases, RNA
synthesis is catalyzed by the viral replication–transcription complex that includes
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase subunits that confer processivity (nsp7, nsp8) and a
3′–5′ exonuclease (nsp14) that proofreads nascent RNA and excises
misincorporated nucleotides—a rare activity among viral RdRp complexes.76 Coronaviruses are endowed with genomes that are among the largest of all RNA
viruses, and the proofreading function of nsp14 is highly conserved in the Coronaviridae
family. Proofreading helps maintain the integrity of coronavirus genomes and is likely
essential for the evolution of their complexity and adaptability.76,159 Despite this relative stability,
mutations do occur and their cumulative effects are a source of global concern..

The mean rate of evolutionary change in SARS-CoV-2, or, more accurately, the rate at which
alleles are fixed in the population, can be estimated using viral sequence information and
sampling dates (Figure 13A).160,161 Current data from a curated global
subsample of SARS-CoV-2 sequences suggest the virus is evolving at a rate of approximately
7.5 × 10–4 substitutions per site per year, which corresponds to
about one substitution every 16 days.161,162 Nucleotide insertions and deletions are often observed,
but synonymous substitutions are the primary source of genetic variation. Given its recent
spillover from a zoonotic reservoir, estimated to have occurred in late November 2019,
further adaptation toward increased fitness in humans is to be expected.162 Indeed, the first “mutation of concern”, an Asp to Gly substitution at
amino acid position 614 in the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein (D614G), was first identified early
in the pandemic, becoming the globally dominant form of the virus by June 2020.163 The D614G substitution increases the efficiency of cell entry and
replication in vitro(164) and enhances transmission in
animal models165 and in human populations.166 The
D614G mutation lies outside the RBD, and recent cryoEM studies suggest that it facilitates
the transition of spike protein to the open conformation, thereby promoting receptor
binding, membrane fusion, and viral infection.167.

Global phylogeny of SARS-CoV-2 and the evolution of variant strains. (A) Phylogenetic
tree showing evolutionary relationships between SARS-CoV-2 viruses from the ongoing
COVID-19 pandemic, from 3913 genomes sampled between December 2019 and February 2021.
The spike protein D614G substitution (arrow), which is carried by virtually all
currently circulating viruses, emerged early in the course of the pandemic. Clade
20I/501Y.V1 (UK variant B.1.1.7); 20C/501Y.V2 (South African variant B.1.351);
20J/501Y.V3 (Brazil variant P1) are indicated. Figure is adapted from Nextstrain, under
a C-BY-4.0 license.160,161 (B) Amino acid substitutions in the SARS-CoV-2 spike locus shared by
variants from the UK (20I/501Y.V1; B.1.1.7), South Africa (20C/501Y.V2; B.1.351), and
Brazil (20J/501Y.V3; P1) are shown along with other lineage-defining mutations. (C)
Locations of the N501Y (left) and E484 K (right) substitutions in SARS-CoV-2 spike
trimers (gray), showing the RBD of one subunit bound to the human ACE2 receptor (green).
B and C are adapted from ref (211), CoVariants:
SARS-CoV-2 Mutations and Variants of Interest, licensed under a GNU Affero General
Public License (AGPL).211 Copyright 2020–2021 Emma
Hodcroft..

At least two waves of adaptation can be expected when a newly evolved pathogen acquires the
ability to infect new host populations. While selection for increased transmission between
immunologically naive hosts initially prevails, as the immune status of the host population
increases due to natural infection or vaccination, further adaptations may take place in
response to selective pressures to evade immunity. Substantial evidence indicates that both
selective forces are now shaping the global phylodynamics of SARS-CoV-2, resulting in the
emergence of new viral strains that display partially overlapping collections of mutations,
presumably due to convergent evolution (Figure 13B).162,168,169 Three newly emerged variant strains, all decedents of the
D614 lineage, are now attracting global attention..

The most widely distributed variant SARS-CoV-2 strain, B.1.1.7 (also 201/501Y.V1, Figure 13), first emerged in southeast England in
December 2020170 and rapidly became the predominant strain throughout the
UK. As of February 23, 2021, its global distribution has expanded to include 93
countries.171 The strain was initially defined by a collection of 14
nonsynonymous substitutions and three deletions, with 8 of 17 mutations located in the spike
protein. The extent of divergence of B.1.1.7 was surprising, as most branches in the
SARS-CoV-2 phylogenetic tree show only a few defining mutations that accumulate slowly over
time. Several alterations in spike protein had been observed in different lineages,
suggesting they arose independently in response to similar selective pressures. These
include a two amino acid deletion (H69-) in the N-terminal domain that had previously been
associated with immune evasion,172 a substitution (P681H) located
adjacent to the S1/S2 furin cleavage site that is essential for entry into human lung
cells,173 and the N501Y mutation in the spike RBD that increases
binding affinity for ACE2 receptors (Figure 13C).174 Although observations on the properties of individual
mutations may be informative, the critical question is how they act together to affect virus
behavior. Presently, B.1.1.7 has a substantial fitness advantage over other circulating
lineages, with an estimated increase in person to person transmission of
50–70%.175 Fortunately, there is little evidence for a
clinically significant decline in antibody neutralization titers in convalescent
sera,176 including sera from individuals previously vaccinated with the
Moderna177 or Pfizer mRNA products.178 Whether
B.1.1.7 causes more severe illness remains controversial, but a preliminary study reports an
estimated 35% (CI 12–64%) higher hazard of death associated with infection by this
strain.179 As the number of infections due to this hyper-transmissible
lineage increases worldwide, so does the likelihood that further mutations will evolve..

Two more variant strains have recently emerged that are also of major concern, one
discovered in South Africa and designated B.1.351 (also 20H/501Y.V2) and the other first
identified in Brazil (P.1, also 20J/501Y.V3). Both variants carry multiple mutations which
include the N501Y allele found in B.1.1.7 as well as additional mutations that are shared
with each other (Figure 13B). Most notable is the
E484K substitution in the RBD (Figure 13C), which
increases ACE2 binding in a manner that is further augmented by N501Y.180
Accumulating evidence indicates that the E484K allele emerged independently on multiple
occasions as a result of immune-driven selection.181 E484K facilitates
measurable escape from neutralizing antibodies present in convalescent serum as well as a
modest decrease in neutralization by serum from individuals that were vaccinated with the
Moderna or Pfizer mRNA vaccines.182 Although the initial phase 3 clinical
trials conducted by Moderna and Pfizer preceded the discovery of these strains, subsequent
phase 3 trials with newer vaccines included populations with high rates of infection by
variants of concern. In a recent trial by Johnson & Johnson involving 45,000 volunteers,
the efficacy of their single-dose, adenoviral-vectored, Ad26.COV2.S vaccine in conferring
protection against moderate to severe COVID-19 was 72% in the United States, 66% in Latin
America, and 57% in South Africa, 28 days postvaccination.183 The lower
efficacy in South Africa is suspected to be due to the rise of the B.1.351 variant. Despite
this result, the protective efficacy against severe disease was 85% across all regions
studied, with complete protection observed against hospitalization and death.53 A preliminary analysis of phase 3 clinical trial data by Novavax indicated
that their two-dose nanoparticle vaccine, NVX-CoV2373, conferred nearly 90% protection
against COVID-19 in the UK but just under 50% protection in South Africa.184 In all cases that were analyzed, vaccine failures were caused by the
B.1.351 variant, and even more troubling was the finding that several trial participants
became infected with B.1.351 despite having previously suffered from COVID-19..

We are now at a critical point where advances in vaccine technology and deployment must be
strategically aligned with viral evolution. This task could become increasingly challenging
as the number of SARS-CoV-2 infections continues to expand. The recent discovery of B.1.1.7
variants that have acquired the E484K substitution vividly illustrates this challenge,
raising concern that hypertransmissive strains with increased capacity for immune evasion
may have already emerged. Gaining control of the situation will require a number of parallel
efforts. The first is to vaccinate as many people as possible on a global scale and to do it
as quickly as we can to decrease the global viral pool participating in the formation of
mutants. The second is to exploit the inherent adaptability of newly developed vaccine
platforms. mRNA vaccines, for example, are rapidly modifiable to encode newly evolved
antigens, and both Moderna and Pfizer have announced plans to build second-generation
vaccines expressing B.1.351 variant spike proteins to provide variant-specific
boosting.158,185
Similarly, Novavax has announced plans to incorporate B.1.351 spike sequences in their
self-assembling protein nanoparticles. Similar strategies could be used to issue
immunological updates to vaccinated hosts over time to keep pace with the evolution of
SARS-CoV-2..

Should the above strategies fail to control immune escape variants, a longer-term strategy
would be to boost T-cell contributions and to target CoV-2 antigenic sites that are not
subject to the same rate of mutation as the spike protein.186 One
possible approach is to develop multivalent vaccines that present multiple B-cell and T-cell
epitopes, as described above..

The global COVID-19 vaccine drive has introduced a new era in structure-based vaccine
design, in addition to drawing on nano-enabled approaches to deliver engineered vaccines to
the immune system.1,4,10,13,14,55,70,187,188 These efforts
have advanced the structural vaccinology concept that was initially implemented to obtain
stable expression of type I fusion proteins from RSV (F protein), HIV-1 gp160 (env),
influenza hemagglutinin, and the spike proteins from MERS and SARS-CoV1. Moderna and Pfizer
took this discovery forward by developing engineered nucleic acid constructs for the
expression of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein in a prefusion conformation, thereby enabling
these vaccines to generate strong neutralizing antibody responses. A parallel development
was the self-assembly of engineered full-length S protein and computerized design of a
viral-like particle with multivalent RBD display.72 Not only are the
strategies coming from current SARS-CoV-2 vaccination efforts reinvigorating vaccine design
for RSV, influenza, HIV-1, and other pathogens, but they are also highlighting principles
for continuously updating vaccine composition using rapidly reprogrammable platforms. This
provides a new approach to vaccinology. With the current rate of technological improvement,
we can expect that COVID-19 vaccines will emerge that are capable of generating high titers
of neutralizing antibodies, eliciting robust TH1-mediated immune responses, inducing
long-term memory, and providing broader protection against SARS-CoV-2 variants and other
cross-reactive coronaviruses. Another important lesson from current vaccine efforts is the
necessity of developing comprehensive and real-time surveillance, data analysis,
high-throughput approaches for genotyping and phenotyping viral isolates, as well as
efficient methods for altering, testing, approving, manufacturing, and deploying newly
synthesized CoV-2 vaccines.160,163 Just as software updates are a fact of life, vaccine updates should be
similarly expected and expedited..

Although it is too early to make firm predictions about the outcomes of the current vaccine
drive, it is reasonable to expect major impacts on symptomatic as well as severe disease,
hospitalization, and mortality, even prior to reaching the herd immunity threshold,
estimated to occur when 70–85% of the population is protected. There are already
indications from the phase 3 clinical trials conducted by Johnson & Johnson that their
adenoviral-vectored vaccine is 66% effective at preventing moderate to severe COVID-19, with
85% efficacy against the most serious illness.183 The vaccine also
prevented mortality among the 43,000 participants in that trial. In addition, it has
recently been demonstrated that Pfizer’s vaccine trial data hold up in the real-world
vaccination drive in Israel.189 This study compared almost 600,000 people
receiving the Pfizer vaccine between December 20, 2020, and February 1, 2021, against a
cohort of similar size that was not vaccinated. After two vaccine doses, the vaccinated
subjects were 94% less likely to develop symptomatic illness and 87% less likely to be
hospitalized. It is also of interest that this outcome was achieved in a study cohort where
a large number of the infections could be ascribed to the UK CoV-2 variant (B.1.1.7). It is
important to take into consideration that the Israeli vaccination campaign is far ahead of
most other countries, and we need to keep an eye on what will happen in other sectors of the
world where vaccination may proceed less rapidly due to inadequate supply lines, ineffective
vaccine distribution, lack of societal acceptance, and the rapid evolution of new viral
variants..

If and when herd immunity can be achieved remain unanswered questions. There are an
increasing number of predictions that COVID-19 will become an endemic
disease.190−192 A Nature
survey among immunologists, infectious disease experts, and virologists (who are active in
the coronavirus field) recently found that 90% of the respondents were of the opinion that
the coronavirus will become endemic, with the implication being that the virus may continue
to circulate for a number of years in small cohorts in the global community.190 Although this circulation could lead to the continuation of infection,
similar to disease occurrence related to common cold coronaviruses, the failure to eradicate
SARS-CoV-2 completely does not mean that disease severity, mortality, or social isolation
will continue at current levels, particularly if the vaccination campaign can push
populations close to herd immunity. Interestingly, the factors that were identified as
possible drivers for endemic SARS-CoV-2 circulation in the survey were listed, in decreasing
order of importance, as immune escape, waning immunity, uneven vaccine distribution, vaccine
hesitancy, lack of political will, and the presence of animal reservoirs.193.

The authors declare the following competing financial interest(s): Andre E. Nel is a
co-founder and equity holder in Westwood Biosciences Inc. and NAMMI Therapeutics. He also
serves on the Board for Westwood Biosciences Inc. Jeff F. Miller is a co-founder, equity
holder and board member of Pylum Biosciences, Xyphos Inc, and Dermolytica Inc., and SAB
member of Notitia Biosciences..

We thank Holly Bunje for assistance in obtaining permission to use published material for
the figures and proofreading the manuscript, as well as updating the references. Research in
Dr. Nel’s lab is supported by the National Cancer Institute of the National
Institutes of Health under Award Number, 1R01CA247666-01A1. Research in Dr. Miller’s
lab is supported by the Kavli Foundation and the Shaffer Family Foundation..

