The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic recently entered an alarming new phase with the emergence of the variants of concern (VOC) and understanding their biology is paramount to predicting future ones. Current efforts mainly focus on mutations in the spike glycoprotein (S), but changes in other regions of the viral proteome are likely key. We analyzed more than 900,000 SARS-CoV-2 genomes with a computational systems biology approach including a haplotype network and protein structural analyses to reveal lineage-defining mutations and their critical functional attributes. Our results indicate that increased transmission is promoted by epistasis, i.e., combinations of mutations in S and other viral proteins. Mutations in the non-S proteins involve immune-antagonism and replication performance, suggesting convergent evolution. Furthermore, adaptive mutations appear in geographically disparate locations, suggesting that either independent, repeat mutation events or recombination among different strains are generating VOC. We demonstrate that recombination is a stronger hypothesis, and may be accelerating the emergence of VOC by bringing together cooperative mutations. This emphasizes the importance of a global response to stop the COVID-19 pandemic..

This manuscript has been authored by UT-Battelle, LLC, under contract DE-AC05-00OR22725 with the US Department of Energy (DOE). The US government retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the US government retains a nonexclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, worldwide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this manuscript, or allow others to do so, for US government purposes. DOE will provide public access to these results of federally sponsored research in accordance with the DOE Public Access Plan (http://energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-access-plan).

”Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution” -Theodosius Dobzhansky.

In late 2020, three SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern (VOC); B.1.1.7 (Alpha), B.1.351 (Beta), and P.1 (Gamma), rapidly spread due to enhanced transmission rates and have since been linked to increased hospitalizations and mortalities [1–9]. In early 2021, several new VOC appeared including, B.1.617 (Delta), B.1.427 (Epsilon), and B.1.526 (Iota). B.1.617 initiated the COVID-19 crisis in India [10] and is now causing the majority of new infections worldwide, even in geographic regions with robust sampling and early detection. There is therefore a critical need to identify accurate predictors and biological causes for the emergence of VOC to predict future ones..

Towards that end, two major weaknesses of recent efforts need to be addressed. First, the predominant mutations used to identify and describe the VOC are in the spike glycoprotein (S) whereas those in other genomic regions are largely ignored, but they are almost certainly biologically important. Second, species-level tools are predominantly used to study the molecular evolution of SARS-CoV-2, but existing population-level tools are a better fit for addressing the important questions related to the VOC [11–13] (Box 1). This has significant implications for societal responses to the ongoing pandemic. For example, the D614G and N501Y substitutions in S, associated with increased virulence, have appeared in geographically distant regions, but their emergence patterns indicate that the mechanisms of their evolution significantly differ. Such observations are not straightforward using species-level approaches. For D614G, this pattern appears to be a result of mutation followed by simple inheritance, but the case of N501Y is less clear [14] (Figure 1). Its appearance in different VOC could be the result of independent, repeated mutational events, or recombination, which is a common mechanism to accelerate evolution in positive strand RNA viruses such as SARS-CoV-2. This process can occur from co-infection of multiple viral strains in a single individual and has recently been demonstrated in North America and the United Kingdom (U.K.) [15–19]. If the VOC were generated by recombination then the movement of individuals from different geographic regions may be rapidly accelerating the evolution of the virus [17, 20]..

Here, we processed more than 900,000 SARS-CoV-2 genomes and applied a median-joining-network (MJN) algorithm to generate a network derived from linked sets of mutations (a haplotype) and combined those results with protein structural analyses [21, 22]. The haplotype network indicates VOC arose and spread rapidly as a result of specific combinations of mutations (epistasis) in S and non-S proteins. Critically, these VOC spread in a manner consistent with either repeat mutations at adaptive sites or recombination events rather than simple inheritance. We explore the individual effects of key mutations in the SARS-CoV-2 proteome that are shared among different VOC. Specifically, we identify a signature of co-evolution and the molecular basis for it between residue 501 in S and the host ACE2. A test of the hypothesis that repeat mutations are responsible for late 2020 VOC indicates recombination may be a more likely mechanism for their generation and warrants further scrutiny. This work emphasizes the importance of determining the mechanisms of community spread in generating future VOC [23]..

We processed more than 900,000 human and mink SARS-CoV-2 genomes, built a haplotype network using the 640,211 that passed QC, and annotated with PANGO lineages from GISAID (Figure 2 and Supplementary File). This genealogy-based approach to molecular evolution identifies the mutations that define VOC and variants of interest (VOI) based on the edge that initiates their corresponding clusters of nodes (Table 1)..

This approach also facilitates the identification of features common to different VOC/VOI, which can reveal molecular events underlying their rapid spread. For example, the VOC reported in late 2020 (VOC-2020B), B.1.1.7, B.1.351, and P.1, can be defined by a triple amino acid deletion in the nonstructural protein 6 (nsp6; S106_F108del) and the substitution N501Y in S. Notably, in contrast to the latter, very little attention has been dedicated to unravel the biological importance of the mutation in nsp6 (Figure 2a, Table 1). In addition, because the MJN algorithm produces time-ordered mutation series and the frequency of specific haplotypes, our analysis reveals a likely VOC (L-VOC, Table 1) that appeared in April 2020, but was missed. The D.2 variant in Australia was defined by an initial I120F substitution in nsp2 followed by S477N in S, which led to its rapid expansion. In contrast, B.1.160, which carries S S477N solely, did not rapidly expand. This underscores the usefulness of the haplotype network, as it is able to simultaneously convey the timing of mutational events and the frequency of the resulting linked set of mutations, i.e., haplotypes..

A disproportionate number of all haplotypes, including B.1.1.7 and D.2, are present in GISAID from the UK and Australia. In order to account for this sampling bias), we plotted the cumulative number of different variants and compared the resulting slopes of the linear range of the curves (Figure 2c). VOC-2020B and VOC/VOI reported in early 2021 (VOC-2021A and VOI-2021A, respectively; Table 1) display higher daily accumulation rates compared to other variants, e.g. B.1.177, which show less than 1% accumulation per day. Notably, the rapid increase in D.2 (2%), but not B.1.160 (0.7%), supports our interpretation of the haplotype network defining it as a L-VOC and the major role of epistasis (here S S477N and nsp2 I120F). These analyses reinforce the importance of monitoring these variants closely and of identifying haplotypes based on both S and non-S mutations..

Haploid, clonally replicating organisms such as SARS-CoV-2, are predicted to become extinct due to the accumulation of slightly deleterious mutations, i.e., Muller’s ratchet [24]. Recombination is a rescue from Muller’s ratchet and can accelerate evolution by allowing for the union of advantageous mutations from divergent haplotypes [15, 25]. In SARS-CoV-2, recombination manifests as a template switch during replication when more than one haplotype is present in the host cell, i.e., the virus replisome stops processing a first RNA strand and switches to a second one from a different haplotype, producing a hybrid [16]. In fact, because template switching is a necessary step during the negative-strand synthesis of SARS-CoV-2 [26] and is a major mechanism of coronavirus evolution [27], it would be improbable for recombination not to occur in the case of multiple strains infecting a cell [28], especially given that more than 1 billion copies of the virus are generated in an individual during infection [29]..

Several VOC-2020B exhibit large numbers of new mutations relative to any closely related sequence indicating rapid evolution of SARS-CoV-2 (Figure 3a) [30]. For example, the first emergent haplotype of B.1.1.7 differs from the most closely related haplotype by 28 nucleotide changes (red asterisk, Figure 2a). Notably, all 28 differences between the Wuhan reference and B.1.1.7 appeared in earlier haplotypes and, in some cases, in multiple lineages (Table S1) indicating that either repeat mutations at a site or recombination were instrumental to the emergence of VOC-2020B..

We tested the hypothesis that these numerous differences arose from repeat, independent mutations. The majority of the 28 differences (15 of the 28) are deletions that could be considered two single mutational events, as does a 3-bp change in N (28280-22883) since they occur in factors of three (a codon), maintaining the coding frame. The two deletions and the full codon 3-bp change in N combined with the 10 remaining single-site mutations results in the conservative estimate of 13 mutations. The plot of accumulating mutations reveals a linear growth of roughly 0.05 mutations per day based on all lineages (Figure 3a) and therefore it would take 260 days for 13 mutational events to occur. We note that the mutation rate of 0.05 per day is based on neutral, slightly deleterious (common in expanding populations), and adaptive sites of the entire viral population and is therefore a robust unbiased estimate. Furthermore, it is conservative because in many cases the B.1.1.7-defining sites appear to have mutated not twice, but several times (Table S1), and always to the same nucleotide state. Considering this hypothesis, the appearance of B.1.1.7 in October 2020 would require it to have emerged in January 2020 and yet the nearest haplotype harboring S S501Y was not sampled until June 2020 and no intermediate haplotypes have been identified. Likewise, the probability that the 13 mutational events occurred between June and October is 1x10-15 (Supplemental Methods). Even with a mutation rate that is five-fold higher than our estimate (Figure 3a), the occurrence of 13 mutations in a single event is highly improbable (Figure 3c). Therefore, repeat mutation events do not explain the rapid increase in mutation load of B.1.1.7. Alternatively, the rapid accumulation of mutations in B.1.1.7 could be the result of an increased mutation rate just prior to its appearance. To test this hypothesis, we plotted the population-level mutations per day, including repeat mutations at variable sites, which did not reveal any increase in mutation rate at the time of B.1.1.7 emergence, but instead it displayed a decrease with its emergence (Figure 3c, Figure S1)..

Another commonly proposed hypothesis is that the large increase in mutations could have occured in a few particular individuals with immunodeficiency disorders [30]. However, that would have to occur on multiple continents to explain B.1.1.7, B.1.351, and P.1 because these and other haplotypes also show rapid increases in mutation loads at this time (late 2020). In addition, a virus in an immunocompromised individual would be under no selective pressure and mutations would therefore be due to drift and not selection. However, another possibility is that adaptive mutations are generated from repeat infections in human or non-human hosts, and immunocompromised individuals are providing an environment highly conducive to infections from multiple strains and subsequent recombination..

Recombination among divergent haplotypes (Figure 3d) is the most parsimonious explanation for the rapid increase in mutation load in multiple VOC given (1) the absence of a substantial increase in mutation rate at any time prior to the appearance of the VOC along with their increased mutation load, which often occurs from template-switching during replication [16], (2) the widespread and early circulation of the majority of the mutations associated with them in other haplotypes and, (3) that several mutations appear in haplotypes that are clearly disjoint in the network (Figure 2a). For example, N501Y and P681H in S appear in several divergent haplotypes, including one mink subgroup from Denmark and a basal node to B.1.351 (without the nsp6 deletion found in VOC-2020B)..

It has been argued that multiple independent mutation events in S (N501Y, S477N, and P681H) are the result of positive selection [14]. However, mutation is agnostic to selection, i.e., even if sites appearing in multiple lineages are under positive selection, their appearance in disjoint haplotypes still requires repeated mutations in the absence of recombination, which we demonstrated to be unlikely. In addition, B.1.1.7 also carries a mutation in nsp3 that appears in disjoint haplotypes (including mink) but is unlikely to be under selection because it is synonymous, weakening the argument that adaptive evolution and increased mutation rate at a site are linked (although synonymous mutations could be adaptive in some cases)..

In addition, recombination can generate a high number of false-positive tests of positive selection [31], and the complexity of coronavirus recombinants compared to those generated in diploid organisms through homologous chromosome crossovers (Figure 3d) makes that process difficult to detect. Therefore, tests for positive selection based on multiple independent mutations at a site may, in fact, be false positives due to recombination [14]. Alternatively, the majority of the B.1.1.7 mutations could be explained by the admixture and recombination among lineages and in support of this, a random scan of 100 FASTQ files from B.1.1.7 available in the NCBI SRA database identified two co-infected individuals (Table S2)..

The presence of recombinants of SARS-CoV-2 was demonstrated in a recent analysis of sequences in the U.K. that leveraged the geographical and temporal presence of specific sequences whose parents appeared to be from B.1.1.7 and B.1.177-derived strains [19]. Although this demonstrates that recombination is occurring, it does not answer if B.1.1.7 itself arose through recombination. As noted above, the majority of B.1.1.7-defining mutations appeared earlier in the pandemic outside the U.K. (Table S1) and therefore approaches that focus on a single geographic location will miss parental variants if they came from elsewhere. Identification of recombinants using the method of Jackson et. al. [19] is even more difficult if the parental lineages were less fit or rare. The haplotype network here suggests that this is likely the case, given the low frequency of haplotypes that carry a VOC-defining mutation in S compared to haplotypes that gain an additional non-S mutation that displays increased frequency due to epistasis and thus could be sampled. Large-scale analyses with newer methods that include rare variants and a global distribution may be able to determine if B.1.1.7 and other VOC-2020B arose through recombination that resulted in this higher mutation load [32]..

Given our results and previous hypothesis [21] that epistasis is responsible for increased transmission of VOC [37], we performed protein structural analyses and discussed the functional effects of likely key mutations in S and non-S proteins shared by several VOC (Table 1). Overall, VOC-shared mutations in S are mostly associated with an improved capacity of entering host cells and of escaping neutralizing antibodies (Table 2)..


               S D501Y - Site 501 located in the receptor-binding domain (RBD) of SARS-CoV-2 S plays a major role in the affinity of the virus to the host receptor, ACE2 [38]. Structural analyses highlighted the importance of the interactions with human ACE2 (hACE2) near the site 501 of the RBD of S, particularly via a sustained H-bond between RBD N498 and hACE2 K353 [39]. Naturally occurring mutations at site 501, N501Y and N501T are reported to increase affinity to hACE2 [40] and this site is located near a linear B cell immunodominant site [35]. Therefore, the mutation may allow SARS-CoV-2 variants to escape neutralizing antibodies (Figure 4, Figure 5), which is supported by reports of reduced activity against pseudotyped viruses carrying this mutation [41]..

Cross-species transmission of SARS-CoV-2 provides further information on the selectivity of site 501. Repeated infection of mice with human SARS-CoV-2 selected for an S Y501 [42] that likely results in stabilization of the RBD-ACE2 interaction via π-stacking of Y501 with Y41 in ACE2 (Figure 4a-b). Several introductions into farmed mink (Neovison vison), which caused a substantial increase in their mortality [43], have not led to the same selection. To date, reported sequences in GISAID of SARS-CoV-2 in this host carry either S N501 (prevalent), or S T501, which appeared in independent farms (Table S3) [43]. In ACE2 of these taxa, Y41 is conserved but a differing, positively charged amino acid is found nearby (H354). The RBD 501-binding region of the ACE2 is highly conserved, except for site 354, suggesting its important role in viral fitness (Table 3). Ferrets and pangolins carry a large basic residue at site 354 (arginine and histidine, respectively). Absence of transmissions to ferrets even after long-term exposure suggests that ferret infection may require improved viral fitness [44]. In agreement with this, it was reported that the adaptive substitution N501T was detected in all infected ferrets in the laboratory [45]..

To further investigate the role of the G354 versus R354 in the adaptive mutation of site 501 in S, we performed simulations of the truncated complexes of N501-carrying RBD of SARS-CoV-2 and ACE2, from human (hACE2) and ferret (fACE2). The simulations indicate remarkable differences between the two systems in the region surrounding site 501. We identified that the main ACE2 contacts with N501 were the same for both species, namely, Y41, K353, and D355, but the frequency of these contacts is lower in the simulations of fACE2 (Table S4)..

We then analyzed structural features of ACE2 K353 and RBD N501 interactions. Atom distances computed from the simulations indicate a weaker electrostatic interaction between this pair of residues in ferret compared to human (Figure 4d). This effect is accompanied by a conformational change of fACE2 K353. In ferret, the side chain of K353 exhibits more stretched conformations, i.e., a higher population of the trans mode of the dihedral angle formed by the side chain carbon atoms (Figure S2). This conformational difference could be partially attributed to the electrostatic repulsion between the bulky positively charged amino acids, K353 and R354. Additionally, the simulations suggest a correlation, in a competitive manner, between other interactions that these residues display with the RBD. For example, the salt bridge fACE2_R354---RBD_D405 and the H-bond interaction fACE2_K353---RBD_Y495 alternate in the simulations (Figure S3). This also suggests that the salt bridge formed by fACE2 R354 drags K353 apart from RBD N501, weakening the interaction between this pair of residues in ferrets..

These analyses indicate that site 354 in ACE2 significantly influences the interactions with RBD in the region of site 501 and is likely playing a major role in the selectivity of its size and chemical properties. We propose that, in contrast to Y501, a smaller H-bond-interacting amino acid at site 501 of RBD, such as the threonine reported in minks and ferrets, may optimize interactions on the region, e.g., the salt bridge fACE2_R354---RBD_D405. The differences in the region of ACE2 in contact with site 501 seem to have a key role for host adaptation and further investigation may reveal details of the origin of COVID-19..


               S E484K - A recent study suggested that E484 exhibits intermittent interactions with K31 in ACE2 [39]. This mutation is associated with higher affinity to ACE2 [40], which may be explained by its proximity to E75 in ACE2 and possibly the formation of a salt bridge. In addition, this site is part of a linear B cell immunodominant site [35] and S E484K was shown to impair antibody neutralization [41]. This mutation is typically associated with the B.1.351 and P.1 VOC, but it also appeared in some B.1.1.7 variants, again supporting recombination rather than repeat mutation as the mechanism by which VOC-2020B were generated [46].


               S L452R
               - This is a core change in the VOC-2021A (Table 1, Figure 4a-b). Although L452 does not interact directly with ACE2, L452R-carrying pseudovirus displayed increased infectivity in vitro [47], which could be due to a stronger binding to ACE2 via the electrostatic interaction with E35. However, L452R RBD expressed in yeast only slightly improved ACE2-binding [40]. Alternatively, the mutation may cause local conformational changes that impact the interactions of the RBD within the spike trimer or with ACE2. Notably, site 452 resides in a significant conformational epitope and L452R was shown to decrease binding to neutralizing antibodies (Figure 4b) [47, 48]..


               S S477N - The S S477N mutation spread rapidly in Australia (Figure 1, Figure 3b). Site 477, located at loop β4-5 of the RBD, is predicted not to establish persistent interactions with ACE2 [39]. Molecular dynamics simulations suggest that S477N affects the local flexibility of the RBD at the ACE2-binding interface, which could be underlying the highest binding affinity with ACE2 reported from potential mean force calculations and deep mutational scanning [40] [49]. Additionally, this site is located near an epitope and may alter antibody recognition and counteract the host immune response (Figure 4b)..


               S H69_V70del - The H69_V70del (in B.1.1.7) is adjacent to a linear epitope at the N-terminal domain of S (Figure 4a,c) [35], suggesting it may improve fitness by reducing host antibody effectiveness..


               S P681R and P681H
               - Mutations in the multibasic furin cleavage site impacts cell-cell fusion [50, 51] and syncytia (i.e., multinucleate fused cells). Changes here may be a key factor underlying pathogenicity and virulence of SARS-CoV-2 strains [50, 52]. The P681R substitution present in B.1.617 exhibits a remarkable increase in syncytium formation in lung cells, which may explain the increased severity of the disease [23]. The similar substitution, P681H may have a comparable effect..

The potential epistatic partners of the S mutations are proposed to alter the viral replication resources and enhance antagonism to host innate immune responses (Table 2)..


               N R203M - The nucleocapsid (N) protein is the viral genome scaffold, is the most antigenic [53], and is necessary for viral replication [21, 54]. We previously reported that the Ser-Arg-rich motif of this protein (a.a. 183-206) displayed a high number of amino acid changes early in the pandemic consistent with it being under positive selection. A study using Oxford Nanopore™ detected site-specific epigenetic modifications necessary for viral replication [26]. One of the epigenetic site resides in two highly successful SARS-CoV-2 haplotypes; a triple mutation at 28881-28883 (GGG to AAC, R203K, G204R) now found in nearly half of all sequences sampled (diamond nodes, Figure 1) and R203M, which is a defining mutation for B.1.617. This genomic region is highly conserved across several hundred years of coronavirus evolution (Figure S4) [27]. The R203K and G204R changes were recently shown to increase levels of the subgenomic RNA transcripts for N [55] and given that these epigenetic sites were discovered because the RNA pauses as it crosses the molecular nanopore sequencer, it may be that mutations here remove the epigenetic modification and speed the SARS-CoV-2 genome through the replisome. Interestingly, it has been proposed that the R203K, G204R double mutation arose through recombination [55]..


               nsp2 I120F - The role of the nonstructural protein 2 (nsp2) is unknown, but appears to involve multiple interactions with host proteins from a range of processes [56]. Deep learning-based structure prediction and cryo-electron microscopy density recently provided the atomic model of nsp2 (PDB ID 7MSW) and structural information was also used to localize the surfaces that are key for host protein-protein interactions with nsp2 [56]. From this it is hypothesized that nsp2 interacts with ribosomal RNA via a highly conserved zinc ribbon motif to unite ribosomes with the replication-transcription complexes..

The functional impact of the mutation I120F in nsp2 in the L-VOC D.2 is of interest given the MJN results. Site 120, identified in the nsp2 structure on Figure 6a, is a point of hydrophobic contact between a small helix, rich in positively charged residues, and a zinc binding site. The positively charged surface of the helix may be especially relevant for a putative interaction with the phosphate groups from ribosomal RNA. Normal mode analysis from DynaMut2 predicts that the substitution has a destabilizing effect in the protein structure (estimated ΔΔGstability = -2 kcal/mol) [57]. Possibly, this could be caused by π-π stacking interactions of the tyrosine with aromatic residues in the same helix that would disrupt the contacts anchoring it to the protein core (Figure 6b). Additionally, site 120 is spatially close to E63 and E66, which were shown to be relevant for interactions with the endosomal/actin machinery via affinity purification mass spectrometry in HEK293T cells. Remarkably, upon mutation of these glutamates to lysines, there is increased interactions with proteins involved in ribosome biogenesis [56]..


               nsp6 S106_F108del - Nsp6 is critical for viral replication and suppression of the host immune response (Figure 5a and Figure 6c) [60]. Nsp3, nsp4, and nsp6 are responsible for producing double-membrane vesicles from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to protect the viral RNA from host attack and increase replication efficiency (Figure 6c) [61]. The nsp6 S106_F108del is predicted to be located at a loop in the interface between a transmembrane helix and the ER lumen based on a preliminary structural analysis by the AlphaFold2 system (Figure 6d), and we hypothesize that the deletion may affect functional interactions of nsp6 with other proteins. In addition, in agreement with the enhanced suppression of innate immune response reported for B.1.1.7 [62], changes in immune-antagonists, such as nsp6 S106_F108del, may be key to prolonged viral shedding [63]..


               nsp13 D260Y - Nsp13 or the helicase is a component of the replication-transcription complex that unwinds the duplex into single strands in a NTP-dependent manner [64]. The helicase and NTPase activities of nsp13 are highly coordinated, and mutations at the NTPase active site impair both ATP hydrolysis and the unwinding process [65]. The substitution D260Y, present in B.1.427 and B.1.429, is located at the entrance of the NTPase active site and may favor π-π stacking interactions with nucleobases (Figure 6e-f). Given that at high ATP concentrations, SARS-CoV nsp13 exhibits increased helicase activity on duplex RNA [66], it is possible that, similarly, the putative optimization on NPT uptake in nsp13 D260Y favors RNA unwinding..

Additionally, nsp13 is an important antagonist of the innate immune response (Figure 5a); it inhibits the type I interferon response by directly binding to TBK1 that impedes IRF3 phosphorylation [67]. The dual role of nsp6 and nsp13 in immune suppression and viral replication may suggest a convergent evolution of SARS-CoV-2 manifested in most of the VOC, which carries either nsp6 S106_F108del or nsp13 D260Y..

Our network-based analysis of SARS-CoV-2 evolution indicates that mutations in S and in non-S proteins act in an epistatic manner to enhance viral fitness. Particularly, the S D614G substitution increases infectivity and is now predominant in the circulating virus [68], and S N501Y is associated with higher virulence [42]. We show that the expansion of the strains carrying these substitutions only occurred upon their combination with nsp12 L323P [21] and nsp6 S106_F108del, respectively. A hypothesis consistent with these observations is that the changes in S enhance viral entry into the host cells and better escape neutralizing antibodies, but they do not easily transmit due to rapid suppression by a robust innate immune response. A second mutation thus counteracts the immune-driven suppression. In the case of S D614G, the nsp12 L323P may have increased the replication rate of the virus to outcompete the immune response, which is supported by quantification of viral strains in clinical samples [21, 69]. However, the separate effects of S D614G and nsp12 L323P could not be ascribed in the referred study [69] because it did not include individuals infected with variants harboring only one of the mutations..

In the variants carrying S N501Y (VOC-2020B), we hypothesize that nsp6 S106_P108del may affect viral replication in DMVs or suppress the interferon-driven antiviral response [70]. Other mutations may also contribute to that. For example, it was recently shown in vitro that B.1.1.7 exhibits enhanced innate immune evasion, which was attributed to increased transcription of orf9b, nested within the nucleocapsid gene [62], although it was not ruled out that this was due to nsp6 S106_F108del..

Our structural analyses identify other mutations shared among different VOC that reside in key locations of proteins involved in viral replication and/or in innate immune antagonism, such as nsp13 D260Y, suggesting a convergent evolution of SARS-CoV-2 (Table 2). This emphasizes the importance of tracking mutations in a genome-wide manner as a strategy to avoid the emergence of future VOC. For example, an earlier dominant variant in Australia (D.2) that carried the mutations S477N in S and I120F in nsp2 was successfully restrained. However, variants harboring only the S S477N are currently circulating in several European countries (Table S5) and may originate the next VOC if combined with a functionally complementary mutation. We demonstrate that recombination events may be accelerating the junction of haplotypes carrying adaptive and cooperative mutations in S and in non-S proteins and that repeat mutations do not explain the high mutation load of VOC-2020B..

An equally significant outcome from the VOC-defining mutations is escape from the adaptive immune response [71] (Figure 5c). As a case in point, the resurgence of COVID-19 in Manaus, Brazil, in January 2021, where seroprevalence was above 75% in October 2020, is due to immune escape of new SARS-CoV-2 lineages [1]. Broad disease prevalence and community spread of COVID-19 increase the probability that divergent haplotypes come in contact resulting in adaptive epistatic mutations that dramatically enhance viral fitness. This emphasizes that regions with low sequence surveillance can be viral breeding grounds for the next SARS-CoV-2 VOC..

The viral evolution research was funded by the Laboratory Directed Research and Development Program of Oak Ridge National Laboratory, managed by UT-Battelle, LLC for the US Department of Energy (LOIS:10074) and the structural implication work was funded via the DOE Office of Science through the National Virtual Biotechnology Laboratory (NVBL), a consortium of DOE national laboratories focused on the response to COVID-19, with funding provided by the Coronavirus CARES Act. This work was also funded by the United States Government. This research used resources of the Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility (OLCF) and the Compute and Data Environment for Science (CADES) at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, which is supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC05-00OR22725. Figures generated with Biorender and VMD. We gratefully acknowledge the Originating laboratories responsible for obtaining the viral specimens and the Submitting laboratories where genetic sequence data were generated and shared via the GISAID Initiative, on which this research is based..

The viral evolution research was funded by the Laboratory Directed Research and Development Program of Oak Ridge National Laboratory, managed by UT-Battelle, LLC for the US Department of Energy (LOIS:10074) and the structural implication work was funded via the DOE Office of Science through the National Virtual Biotechnology Laboratory (NVBL), a consortium of DOE national laboratories focused on the response to COVID-19, with funding provided by the Coronavirus CARES Act. This work was also funded by the United States Government. This research used resources of the Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility (OLCF) and the Compute and Data Environment for Science (CADES) at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, which is supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC05-00OR22725. Figures generated with Biorender and VMD. We gratefully acknowledge the Originating laboratories responsible for obtaining the viral specimens and the Submitting laboratories where genetic sequence data were generated and shared via the GISAID Initiative, on which this research is based..

All SARS-CoV-2 sequences used in this study are available from the public repositories Genome Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data (GISAID, gisaid.org), the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sars-cov-2/) and the COVID-19 Genomics UK Consortium (COG, https://www.sanger.ac.uk/collaboration/covid-19-genomics-uk-cog-uk-consortium/
         .


               Author Contribution
            .


               MR Garvin: Conceptualization, Data curation, Funding acquisition, Formal Analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing..


               ET Prates: Formal Analysis, Investigation, Visualization, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing.


               J Romero: Conceptualization, Formal Analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Software, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing..


               A Cliff: Methodology, Software, Writing – review & editing.


               JGFM Gazolla: Software, Formal Analysis, Investigation, Data Curation, Visualization, Writing - Review and Editing..


               M Pickholz: Investigation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.


               M Pavicic: Investigation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.


               DA Jacobson: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Formal Analysis, Investigation, Project administration, Supervision, Resources,Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.

Each node represents a haploid sequence (haplotype) and the edge between each node indicates a mutational event leading to a new haplotype much like a family pedigree. Node sizes reflect population frequencies. Mutations can be passed down by descent after a single mutational event as was the case for the D614G mutation in the spike glycoprotein (S) (left). Conversely, N501Y in S appears in different genealogical lineages, which could be from independent mutation events, or from recombination among different viral strains co-infecting an individual (right). Determining which process is occurring has significant implications for addressing current variants of concern and predicting future ones..


               a. MJN-based network built from haplotypes found in more than 25 individuals (N=640,211 sequences) using 2,128 variable sites. Nodes indicate a haplotype and size reflects frequency. Edges denote ordered mutation events that may be a single change or many at one time. Colors identify PANGO lineages from GISAID. Diamond-shaped nodes correspond to haplotypes carrying a three nucleotide deletion in the nucleocapsid gene (N) at sites 28881-28883 (R203K and G203R). Black square nodes are inferred haplotypes, dashed-line boxes define subgroups of haplotypes within a lineage with a disjoint mutation that is also found in VOC that could indicate repeat mutation events or recombination. Red asterisk indicates the edge leading to B.1.1.7 and represents 28 nucleotide changes discussed in text. Several lineages show introgression from others (e.g., cyan nodes, B.1.160, into brick red, B.1.177). We note that P.1 and B.1.351 are under-sampled compared to B.1.1.7. b. Several important mutations in S and non-S proteins appear in multiple variants of concern (VOC). For example, the B.1.1.7 variant carries four mutations that are in disjoint haplotypes: S N501Y, S P681H, a silent mutation in the codon for amino acid 1089 in nsp3, and the S H69_V70del that is also found in a clade of haplotypes from mink, identified by the blue dashed-line box in (a). c. Accumulation rate for common GISAID lineages including VOC and likely (L-VOC) represented by the ratio between the accumulated number of reported sequences of a given lineage per day since the appearance of that haplotype (Nacc) divided by the corresponding total number (Ntot) at the final sample date for this study (April 2021). Colors of curves correspond to node colors in (a). All VOC display accumulation rates of at least 1% of the total for that variant per day. The remaining are less than 1%, except for the VOI B.1.526 (not displayed in the network), with the highest rate of 3% per day, indicating that further scrutiny of this variant is warranted. We also plotted the accumulation rate for lineages that carry the widely reported S D614G mutation but without the nsp12 P323L commonly found with it, supporting our previous hypothesis [21] that mutations in S alone are not responsible for the rapid transmission of these VOC/VOI but is resulting from epistasis among S and non-S mutations. Reference sequence: NC_045512, Wuhan, December 24, 2019..


               a. A rapid increase in the number of mutations per individual genome is evident in the VOC-2020B (B.1.1.7, B.1.351, and P.1). The outliers of the B.1.1.7 lineages (mint green) are a subset of that lineage due to a single, 57 nucleotide deletion in ORF7a (amino acids 5-23). Mutation rate based on a linear regression of genome-wide mutation load for five common lineages and all lineages varies between 0.04 and 0.06 mutations per day. b. Probability estimate for 13 mutations occurring in a single event as a function of mutation rate. c. Population-level analysis of new mutations per day (accounting for multiple mutations per site) displays a declining rate of mutations after the emergence of B.1 (S D614G and nsp12 P323L). A slight increase around the emergence of D.2 in Australia (May 2020) is also evident. There is not an increase in rate with the emergence of B.1.1.7 that could explain the rapid accumulation of mutations shown in (a). d. Contrast between recombination in a diploid organism (four haploid gametes) and in RNA+ betacoronaviruses. In a diploid organism, recombinants are produced from the crossover of homologous chromosomes during meiosis. In SARS-CoV-2, recombination occurs when two or more strains (haplotypes) infect a single cell (1). The replisome dissociates (2) from one strand and switches to another, (3) generating a hybrid RNA. The resulting chimera (4) can be as simple as a section of strain A (pink) fused to a section of strain B (yellow) or more complex recombinants if strand switching occurs more than once or there are multiple strains per cell (green). 1 billion copies are estimated in an individual during infection [27]..


               a. Several mutations associated with dominant haplotypes are located in the receptor-binding domain (RBD, aa. 331-506), N-terminal domain (NTD, aa. 13-305), and subdomains 1 and 2 (SD1/2, aa. 528-685) of S. The structure of S in the prefusion conformation derived from PDB ID 6VSB [33] and completed in silico [34] is shown. Glycosyl chains are not depicted and the S trimer is truncated at the connecting domain for visual clarity. The secondary structure framework of one protomer is represented and the neighboring protomers are shown as a gray surface. b. Mutation sites in the S RBD of SARS-CoV-2 VOC, such as 484, 452, 477, and 501 are located at or near the interface with ACE2. Notably, site 452 and 484 reside in an epitope that is a target of the adaptive immune response in humans (aa. 480-499, in violet) and site 501 is also located near it [35]. Dashed lines represent relevant polar interactions discussed here. PDB ID 6M17 was used [36]. c. The sites 69 and 70 on the NTD, which are deleted in the VOC B.1.1.7, are also found near an epitope (aa. 21-45, in violet) [35]. d. Time progression of N---O distances between atoms of N501 in RBD and K353 in human and ferret ACE2 (hACE2 and fACE2, respectively) from the last 500 ns of the simulation runs. Colors in the plots correspond to the distances K353_N---N501_O (cold colors) and K353_O---N501_N (warm colors) in three independent simulations of each system. These distances are represented in the upper part of the figure..


               a. As part of the innate immune response, (Step 1) the SARS-CoV-2 virus is internalized into endosomes and degraded. (Step 2) viral RNA activates the mitochondrial antiviral innate immunity (MAVS) pathway and (Step 3) degraded proteins activate the toll receptor pathway (TLR3/TLR7), which result in the (Step 4) phosphorylation of TBK1 and translocation of NF-kB and IRF3 to the nucleus, where they regulate the transcription of immune genes including interferons (IFNs, Step 5). IFNs recruit CD8+ T cells that, (Step 6) recognize fragments of the virus on the cell surface via their class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC I) receptors and are activated by dendritic cells (antigen processing cells, or APC). If the virus bypasses innate immunity (orange arrows) nonstructural proteins (nsp6 and nsp13) block the IRF3 nuclear translocation. b. APCs recruit B lymphocytes and stimulate the production of antibodies that recognize SARS-CoV-2 S (whereas T cells recognize fragments of S bound to MHC I). c. The neutralizing antibodies block binding of the virus to the ACE2 receptor and can prevent re-infection but mutations in the receptor-binding domain (RBD), e.g., S Asn501Tyr, prevent binding of the antibodies and the virus is then able to bind the receptor again even if individuals experienced exposure to an earlier strain or were vaccinated. Created with BioRender.com.
            .


               a. Site 120 in nsp2 is located in a small helix near a zinc-binding site and residues E63 and E66, which play a role in the interaction with proteins involved in ribosome biogenesis and in the endosomal/actin machinery [56]. PDB ID 7MSW was used. b. I120 forms some of the hydrophobic contacts that anchor the helix at the surface of nsp2, where this site resides, to the protein core. c. Nsp6 participates in generating double-membrane vesicles (DMV) for viral genome replication. Natural selection for the biological traits of viral entry and replication may explain the increased transmission of variants with adaptive mutations in both S and nsp6. DMVs isolate the viral genome from host cell attack to provide for efficient genome and sub-genome replication and generate virions. d. Sites 106-108 are predicted to be located at/near the protein region of nsp6 embedded in the endoplasmic reticulum lumen (structure generated by AlphaFold2 [58]). e. Nsp13 is the SARS-CoV-2 helicase and it is part of the replication complex. f. D260 in nsp13 is mutated to tyrosine in B.1.427 and B.1.429 and it is located at the entrance of the NTP-binding site. PDB ID 6XEZ was used [59]..

Potential epistatic mutations in S and non-S proteins that define SARS-CoV-2 lineages discussed here are shown. VOC/VOI are grouped in classes according to their peak time of emergence using the notation VOC/VOI-(year and period of emergence), with A and B corresponding to the first and last six months of the year, respectively. The nomenclature of the lineages used by the Center for Disease Control (CDC) are listed. L-VOC denotes likely variants of concern, that is, those that we propose to have strong potential to become VOC. Non-VOC (N-VOC) are not identified by CDC as VOC. The functional impact of mutations highlighted in red are discussed in the text..

E484Q appeared early in Delta but did not persist.

Likely key VOC-shared mutations, highlighted in Table 1, are analyzed. SARS-CoV-2 lineages are represented as symbols using the color code introduced in Figure 1. Mutations in S are associated with enhanced binding-affinity to host ACE2, neutralizing antibody escape, and increased syncytia formation. Mutations in non-S proteins might change virion production and enhance antagonism to host innate immune responses. A confidence label is assigned to these functional effects as (+) predicted from structural analysis or (++) inferred from experimental evidence. In S, the receptor-binding domain (RBD), N-terminal domain (NTD), and subdomains 1 and 2 (SD1/2) are specified..

Relative to the human sequence, almost all these residues are either conserved (“|”) or replaced by a nearly equivalent amino acid in mouse, American mink, European mink, ferret, and pangolin. Notably, there is a nonconservative substitution of G354 to a bulky positively charged amino acid in most species. Our structural analyses suggest that this substitution contributes to a putative host-dependent selective pressure at site 501 of SARS-CoV-2 S. Prevalent residues reported at this site are informed in order of frequency..

