These authors contributed equally to the work..

These authors contributed equally to the work..

More than any other infectious disease epidemic, the COVID-19 pandemic has been characterized by the generation of large volumes of viral genomic data at an incredible pace due to recent advances in high-throughput sequencing technologies, the rapid global spread of SARS-CoV-2, and its persistent threat to public health. However, distinguishing the most epidemiologically relevant information encoded in these vast amounts of data requires substantial effort across the research and public health communities. Studies of SARS-CoV-2 genomes have been critical in tracking the spread of variants and understanding its epidemic dynamics, and may prove crucial for controlling future epidemics and alleviating significant public health burdens. Together, genomic data and bioinformatics methods enable broad-scale investigations of the spread of SARS-CoV-2 at the local, national, and global scales and allow researchers the ability to efficiently track the emergence of novel variants, reconstruct epidemic dynamics, and provide important insights into drug and vaccine development and disease control. Here, we discuss the tremendous opportunities that genomics offers to unlock the effective use of SARS-CoV-2 genomic data for efficient public health surveillance and guiding timely responses to COVID-19..

COVID-19, a contagious disease caused by the novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), has reached an extraordinary scale not seen since the influenza pandemic of 1918–1919
1
. Within a month of its first reported case in China in December 2019, COVID-19 had spread to many regions in China
2
 and had been detected in several neighboring countries, including Thailand, Korea, and Japan. As international flights continued to operate, SARS-CoV-2 then spread to Europe and North America in a short amount of time, and was soon declared a global pandemic
3,4
. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), in the first 16 months of the pandemic (through April 8, 2021), more than 132.7 million people became infected worldwide, resulting in more than 2.8 million deaths
5
..

Over the past two decades, the biomedical community has become equipped with infrastructure for basic genomic techniques to support epidemic responses
6
, a capability that has enabled the rapid collection of SARS-CoV-2 genomic information which has allowed observation of SARS-CoV-2 genomic evolution online, rapid tracking of SARS-CoV-2 genetic groups, lineages, variants, variants of interest (VOI) and variants of concern (VOC)
7
. The precise and rapid tracking of SARS-CoV-2 genetic changes facilitates fast development of SARS-CoV-2 clinical tests and predicting the efficiency of the vaccines. As sequencing technologies and genomic analysis tools progress, genome sequencing is becoming more widely integrated into clinical and healthcare workflows. However, the utilization of genomic sequencing to its full potential for public health surveillance and outbreak response efforts has yet to be established and depends on the broad expansion of the best practices for preventing and limiting outbreaks that had been determined during the COVID-19 response
8
. Herein, we discuss the genomic capacities that can be used to address many of the public health issues associated with COVID-19 (Box 1)..

Genomic analysis conducted on respiratory specimens isolated from the first COVID-19 patients hospitalized in December, 2019, in Wuhan, China, allowed for the prompt detection and characterization of a novel coronavirus, later named SARS-CoV-2, by January 2020
3,4,9,10
. Initial sequence analyses revealed that SARS-CoV-2 shared 80% nucleotide identity with SARS-CoV
11,12
, strongly indicating that SARS-CoV-2 was likely a respiratory pathogen that could spread from human to human and hence with clear epidemic potential. These initial analyses also revealed that SARS-CoV-2 shared high sequence similarity with related viruses found in bats and pangolins, suggesting a zoonotic origin10,n,13–:L9. Across its complete genome, SARS-CoV-2 is most closely related to the bat coronavirus RaTG13, with which it shares approximately 96% nucleotide sequence identity. However, different SARS-CoV-2 coding regions share greater similarity to those of other animal coronaviruses. For example, the spike (S) protein receptor-binding domain (RBD) exhibits higher sequence identity (97.4%) to that of the Guangdong pangolin virus, rather than to RaTG13 (89.3%), while SARS-CoV-2 long 1ab (replicase) open reading frame (ORF) exhibits the highest sequence identity (98.8%) with the RmYN02 bat coronavirus
20
. In further support of zoonotic origin, another coronavirus detected in five bats (RacCS203) is genetically closely related to SARS-CoV-2
21
, and neutralizing antibodies for SARS-CoV-2 were found in wild pangolins and bats from Thailand
21
. Moreover, there is similarity between SARS-CoV-2 zoonosis and the zoonoses of the SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV coronaviruses, as data indicate that in all three cases, other intermediate animals were likely present in their transmission chains
22,23
. Together, these findings suggest a complex history of recombination events prior to the zoonotic transfer of SARS-CoV-2 to humans, although when and in which hosts these events took place remains unclear
13,14,19,24
. Genomic knowledge acquired through viral sequencing and phylogenetic analysis greatly contributed to the rapid determination of the potential epidemiological characteristics and origins of SARS-CoV-2
25
..

As seen with other recent viral epidemics, viral genome sequencing has become an essential part of the COVID-19 public health response
26
. Early access to SARS-CoV-2 genome sequences allowed for the timely development and production of nucleic acid amplification testing (NAAT)-based diagnostics, expedited vaccine development, and accelerated opportunities for SARS-CoV-2 genomics-based real-time surveillance
27–32
. The first SARS-CoV-2 tests and vaccine candidates appeared within one and three months, respectively, after the identification of the first COVID-19 patient
32–34
. Together with access to modern sequencing technologies, the scale of the pandemic, based on numbers of cases and affected regions, has prompted the collection of SARS-CoV-2 viral genomic data at an unparalleled magnitude (on average 2,500 genomes per day). Consequently, the capacity to track virus spread and evolution in real time has been accelerated relative to that associated with prior outbreaks
35
. When the WHO initially declared a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC) on January 30, 2020, 339 SARS-CoV-2 genomes had already been collected and characterized
2–4,28
. By April 7, 2021, public repositories that host SARS-CoV-2 genomes contained over 1,000,000 genomes
36–38
 (Table S1). Notably, by the end of the sixth month of the pandemic (May 2020), Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data (GISAID) and the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) databases included 110,000 SARS-CoV-2 full-length genome sequences as compared to more than the 8,000 HIV full-length genome sequences collected by the Los Alamos sequence National Laboratory
39
 over the past 40 years
40
 (Figure 1a). 86% of available SARS-CoV-2 raw sequencing data at NCBI is Illumina data, 13.7% is Oxford Nanopore, and 0.3% is Pacbio, IonTorrent and BGISEQ (Figure S1). There is a correlation between the number of submitted sequences per capita and the GDP per capita for the majority of the countries in the world, moreover, high-income countries submitted about 100x more sequences per capita on average than did low-income countries (Figure 1b, S2). However, it is remarkable that African nations with a low GDP per capita sequenced viral genomes on a level comparable to that of middle-and high-income countries
41
. Indeed, due to several previous programs that were aimed at controlling outbreaks of other viruses in Africa, the sequencing capacity of the African healthcare system improved, helping to increase its efficiency in the sequencing of SARS-CoV-2 genomes
41
 (Figure 1c). Countries with the highest ratios for numbers of SARS-CoV-2 genomes sequenced to numbers of COVID-19 cases and relatively low number of reported cases per capita were Taiwan, New Zealand, Australia, Iceland, and Denmark (Figure 1d)..

The unprecedented scale of SARS-CoV-2 genome sequencing offers unique opportunities for tracking SARS-CoV-2 evolution online and detecting the emergence and spread of new VOI and VOC
42–44
 (Figure 2). Due to SARS-CoV-2 genome sequencing and consequent bioinformatics analysis it was shown that because of an intrinsic RNA proofreading mechanism, coronaviruses exhibit lower mutation rates than do many other RNA viruses, such as Ebola virus and HIV
45–48
. In addition, their evolutionary (i.e., nucleotide substitution) rate partly reflects the action of host-dependent RNA-editing enzymes (e.g., APOBEC)
49
. Coronaviruses undergo a mean rate of approximately 1.12 x 10-3 nucleotide substitutions per site per year. This is comparable to the SARS-CoV-1 mutation rate from 0.8 x 10-3 to 2.38 x 10-3, Ebolavirus's mutation rate of 1.3 x 10-3 and is lower than seasonal influenza mutation rate of 6.7 x 10-3 and HIV mutation rate of 4.4 x 10-3

45–47,50–52
..

Another important aspect of SARS-CoV-2 evolution is that SARS-CoV-2, like many other RNA viruses, can live in the host as a swarm of closely related variants within individual hosts and has a tendency for recombinations
53
. Genomic studies have demonstrated the presence of such intra-host diversity inside hosts
54–60
, with one study having identified between 1 and 52 haplotype variants in each of 25 clinical patients
54
. Identifying the factors that shape these intra-host viral population structures can promote a better understanding of short-term viral evolution, in addition to providing insights into host adaptation and drug and vaccine design. For example, evidence of intra-host recombination
61
 may enable estimating the role of recombination in the zoonotic origin of SARS-CoV-2
14
 and the emergence of novel viral variants
62–64
..

Over the first year of the epidemic, SARS-CoV-2 has gradually accumulated mutations and developed into several viral lineages as it has spread through the human population
7,65–68
. However, from the advent of the pandemic through approximately September 2020, there was no statistical evidence that any of the numerous characterized SARS-CoV-2 mutations had resulted in a loss or gain of function
45–47
. For example, one study analyzed all 48,454 SARS-CoV-2 genomes available from GISAID from late July of 2020 that had been sequenced throughout the world and identified 12,706 mutations, 398 of which were recurrent, and none of which were associated with a significant change in transmissibility
69
. During the summer of 2020, the D614G mutation in the viral S protein sparked attention because this new variant globally superseded the original SARS-CoV-2 strain globally. Phylogenetic analyses and clinical evidence indicated that, although the D614G variant was associated with both increased viral load and infectivity
68,70
, it was also more susceptible to neutralizing antisera and was not linked to any change in vaccine efficacy or increased pathogenicity
71
..

The first SARS-CoV-2 viral variant of concern (VOC) for public health, known as variant B.1.1.7, was first detected in the UK in September 2020. Genomic analysis revealed that this B.1.1.7 variant had first arisen in late Summer or early Fall 2020, and then quickly spread through many countries, including Australia, Denmark, Italy, Iceland, the Netherlands, and now the US
72–74
. However, the full pathogenic potential of this variant was not recognized until December 2020
72
. The B.1.1.7 variant strain harbors at least 12 mutations, including 2 in the S protein: N501Y, which increases the ability of SARS-CoV-2 binding to its cellular receptor, ACE2, and P618H, which adjoins the furin cleavage site in the S protein
75–77
. Both mutations have been associated with a 40-80% increase in the transmissibility of this variant as compared to previous SARS-CoV-2 strains
72
. More recently, the B.1.1.7 variant was found to be associated with greater disease severity and an increased risk of death as compared to other variants
78
. In addition, the variant carries a Δ69-70 deletion that results in detection failure by some SARS-CoV-2 molecular tests, which can limit the successful tracing of this VOC
79
. However, there is no evidence thus far that this variant reduces vaccine efficacy..

The second VOC was discovered in, UK, in September 2020, and was characterized by several mutations, including E484K in the RBD of the S protein. This mutation, which was later discovered to have arisen independently in other viral variants around the world
80
, is associated with reduced neutralizing activity of human convalescent and post-vaccination sera. Additional VOCs related to B.1.1.7 include B.1.351, which was first detected in South Africa in November 2020,
81
 where it spread rapidly. Although the latest reports indicate that this variant has also spread to Zambia and the US, there is no evidence that this mutation impacts disease severity
82
. This variant also harbors multiple mutations in the S protein, such as K417N, E484K, and N501Y..

The third VOC, P.1, was detected in four travelers who arrived in Japan from Brazil in January 2021
83–85
. P.1 carries similar mutations in the RBD domain as B.1.351 (K417T, E484K, N501Y), the latter of which can increase transmissibility and help the virus evade neutralizing antibodies. The impact of the K417T mutation is not known. More recently, another genetic variant B.1.427/B.1.429 was declared as VOC because of its prevalence in the outbreak that happened in California. This variant is harboring the L452R mutation in the S protein that is suspected to confer SARS-CoV-2 antibody resistance, although it is less severe than the E484K mutation, which is associated with greatly reduced viral susceptibility to antibody neutralization
86
. The full and actual list of all VOI and VOC can be found at the official CDC page
87
..

Some of these variants were first independently identified in immunodeficient individuals in different countries, suggesting that their emergence may be the result of convergent evolution followed by rapid spread. For example, the appearance of the ΔH69/ΔV70 deletion was documented in an immunosuppressed individual through deep viral genome sequencing at 23 time points during the course of infection (101 days)
64
. A weakened host immune response can permit the virus to replicate with little or no control, increasing the likelihood for mutations to occur. The independent evolution of a given mutation in different geographic locations suggests that this mutation may confer an adaptive advantage to the virus, such as immune evasion or increased transmissibility, which is corroborated by clinical studies. Given the likely public health importance of these VOCs and VUIs, global surveillance for these and other new variants is expanding, as information for all SARS-CoV-2 lineages is now collected and made available online for the rapid evaluation of their epidemiologic and vaccine impact and short-term evolution based on individual data points
7,88
. In order to gain better control over emerging VOC and VOI, A European Commission Recommendation dated 19 January 2021 stated that "all EU Member States should reach a capacity of sequencing at least 5% - and preferably 10% - of positive test results. In most Member States, the sequencing capacity for identification of SARS-CoV-2 variants is below the recommendation set by the European Commission to sequence 5-10% of SARS-CoV-2 positive specimens'' (Figure 1d)..

Access to rich and diverse publicly available SARS-CoV-2 genomic data across various regions has allowed scientists and public health officials to efficiently track routes along which COVID-19 outbreaks have spread locally and internationally (Figure S3). In this context, phylogenetic and genetic network analyses can provide important public health information regarding viral epidemic spread
89,90
. Importantly, as viruses accumulate genomic mutations within different populations, knowledge regarding such evolution can reveal transmission chains and distinguish imported cases from instances of local transmission if a sufficient number of samples is analyzed, ultimately identifying high risk transmission routes which should be subject to enhance public health control
91–94
. Genomic analysis has allowed the identification of SARS-CoV-2 introduction into Europe from China, into the US from both China and Europe with a subsequent local transmission
91,95–97
. One recent study suggests that SARS-CoV-2 was introduced in the US in Connecticut via a domestic transmission route, while another showed that most successful viral introductions to Arizona were likely from domestic travel
91,98
. Another study revealed that the New York City area exhibited multiple introductions of SARS-CoV-2, primarily from Europe
99
. Similarly, SARS-CoV-2 was potentially introduced into France from several countries, including China, Italy, the United Arab Emirates, Egypt, and Madagascar
92
. We have curated a comprehensive list of genomic outbreak investigations to date for various geographical regions (Table S2). This catalog contains 40 studies and is updated in real-time as more studies are published; an online version is available at https://github.com/Mangul-Lab-USC/COVID-19-outbreak-investigations..

Viral genomics can also be used to monitor the effectiveness of global travel restrictions and lockdowns in different countries in limiting viral spread. For example, genomic analysis showed that the risk of domestic transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in Connecticut exceeded that of international introduction at the time federal travel restrictions were imposed, highlighting the critical need for local surveillance
91
. Similarly in Brazil, three clades of European origin were established prior to the initiation of travel bans and lockdowns
100
. Another genomic analysis showed that, due to violations of imposed lockdowns with sea trade, several SARS-CoV-2 international introductions likely occurred in Morocco
101
. In Australia, lockdown effectiveness was validated using agent-based modeling coupled with SARS-CoV-2 genomic data
102
. On December 19, 2019, due to the new rapidly spreading B.1.1.7 variant found in the UK, the prime minister implemented tighter lockdown and other restrictions, and as a result, many countries closed their borders to people traveling from the UK
103
. The spread of this variant then was precisely tracked in the U.S. due to available sequencing data
104
..

Combining genomic methods with clinical and geospatial data can help characterize viral infectivity, virulence, and death rates of circulating viral strains more accurately because epidemics in different areas of the world may have distinct characteristics that depend on viral genotype, as well the demographics of the host population. Specifically, integration and analysis of phylogenetic and epidemiologic data can provide a more complete understanding of the pandemic transmission dynamics
105
. Available genomic data can also be utilized to examine and partly explain the relationship between genetic variation in strains of SARS-CoV-2 and disease severity
106
. Findings from these studies can also help characterize mutation patterns in various hotspots and identify correlates of infection and death rates in these countries
107
. Novel approaches can be developed to combine population genomics and genetics to leverage the identification of molecular markers with unusual pattern variations or relevant single nucleotide polymorphisms in people from different geographies
67,68
. If SARS-CoV-2 infections continue at their current rate, population genomic research and pharmacogenomics approaches may be useful in the development of personalized therapeutics against this pathogen. Although disease severity can be partly attributed to host genomics, understanding these factors has been difficult due to contradictory evidence and limited host genomics studies conducted thus far to date
108
..

Another genomics-based method for population-level pathogen surveillance assesses the presence of trace viral genomic material in wastewater, with this approach having been successfully employed to track antibiotic use
109
 and tobacco consumption
110
 and for the monitoring of enteric viruses such as poliovirus
111
. Notably, a 2013 study accomplished the early detection of a viral outbreak in Sweden by quantifying hepatitis A virus and norovirus genetic material levels in wastewater
112
. Although COVID-19 is primarily associated with respiratory symptoms, SARS-CoV-2 is regularly shed in feces
113
. As of August 2020, SARS-CoV-2 RNA had been detected in wastewater by over 35 studies in 17 countries using NAAT-based methods (https://www.covid19wbec.org), which can effectively detect the presence and concentration of viruses in wastewater
114
 and potentially estimate the relative number of disease cases in the area covered by the sewage facilities. However, current NAAT-based methods cannot detect whether or not these samples harbor novel mutations
115
, and the development of novel mutations in the template primer binding sites have the potential to compromise the efficacy of NAAT-based methods to detect the viral presence
116
. Additionally, wastewater may contain fragmented or defective genomes which may not be detected with these methods. Alternatively, a potentially promising approach is the application of metagenomics on a global scale to detect, collect, and store samples in preparation for future pandemics
117,118
. Metagenomics methods, which can sequence all available genomic material in a sample, allow the characterization of an entire viral population and the detection of prevalent SARS-CoV-2 variants in a given geographical space
119,120
. Wastewater surveillance studies of SARS-CoV-2 RNA concentration across various regions in the world have taken place between January 2020 and November 2020. (Figure 1e, Table S3)..

Temporal changes in SARS-CoV-2 RNA concentration in wastewater were assessed in Valencia, Spain from February till April 2020, Paris, France from March till April 2020, and in many other regions (see Table S3), they have been consistent with the number of clinically diagnosed cases in a given community
121,122
. This relationship demonstrates the use of wastewater studies as a relatively inexpensive and straightforward method for investigating national outbreak dynamics, especially in areas where case diagnosis is complicated. In contrast, clinical diagnostic testing traditionally used to assess the number of cases in a community typically underestimates actual infection rates
123
, as this approach primarily focuses on symptomatic individuals because the asymptomatic cases are less likely to be captured. However, combining clinical diagnostics with wastewater-based surveillance can potentially provide a more comprehensive community-level profile of both symptomatic and asymptomatic cases, enabling identification of hospital capacity needs
114,124–130
. Additionally, an important advantage of wastewater monitoring is the ability to detect early-stage outbreaks before they become widespread
111,115,131,132
. In contrast to NAAT-based methods such as real time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)-based analysis of SARS-CoV-2, metagenomic sequencing allows for characterization of the prevalent SARS-CoV-2 genomic variants in a defined local region and reveal geospatial SARS-CoV-2 genotype distribution
120,133
. Using wastewater samples can identify circulating lineages in the community and accompany analysis of genomic epidemiology, for example, such analysis has already helped to detect B.1.1.7 strains in the US and Switzerland
134
..

Despite the numerous advantages of wastewater-based virus surveillance, many potential improvements would result in more reliable and extended applications in public health decision-making. Currently, wastewater-based methods require calibration and validation because they only provide a raw measure of the number of cases in a population
115
. Additionally, wastewater-based monitoring lacks the granularity of clinical diagnostic testing and cannot discern a particular area of an outbreak when the wastewater treatment plant serves a large population. Sampling at a higher spatial resolution within the sewer system or even at a building-level scale could potentially provide early indications of viral outbreaks and help monitor their progression
135
. This effort could also include areas with large numbers of septic tank systems that are not feeding municipal wastewater systems..

Viral genomics can also aid in vaccine development and investigations of how viral evolution impacts clinical outcomes and treatment
136
. While the majority of known SARS-CoV-2 mutations have no effect on viral replication and transmission
137
, some substitutions have been linked to phenotypic changes that could influence outbreak dynamics. For example, patients in Singapore infected with Δ382 SARS-CoV-2 variants, which have a 382-nucleotide deletion in ORF8, exhibited milder symptoms compared to patients with viruses that lacked this deletion
138
. However, the Δ382 SARS-CoV-2 variant is very rare globally and appears to have died out in Singapore. More alarmingly, the highly prevalent D614G mutation may increase transmissibility and infectivity in natural populations, giving variants harboring this mutation a marked selective advantage, although the best evidence to date comes from laboratory and simulation studies only
68,95,139
. Lastly, the viral variants B.1.1.7, B.1.351, and P.1, which were detected in late 2020, showed significantly increased transmissibility, heightening concern from a public health perspective
82,140,141
. For vaccine development, understanding the degree to which different regions of the viral genome are prone to mutation is important, as it is necessary to understand whether rising immunity in humans will result in antigenic drift and consequent vaccine escape. These evolutionary effects are commonly seen, for example, in human influenza viruses and endemic coronaviruses. Analyses of the current genomic variability of SARS-CoV-2 suggest that prospective COVID-19 vaccines should be cross-protective for the majority of currently known viral variants
73,108,142
, although some minor variants (< 1% natural occurrence frequency) have been shown to alter the antigenicity of SARS-CoV-2
143
. For vaccine development, determining the structures of SARS-CoV-2 antigens and their mutants is also crucial for the maximization of vaccine efficacy
144
. The online COVID-3D resource allows for the exploration of the structural distribution of genetic variation in SARS-CoV-2
145
..

The antigenic drift may also affect the effectiveness of NAAT-testing because when mutations happen in primer regions, the effectiveness of tests drops due to loss of affinity. Therefore control over appearing mutations should be taken into account for updating NAAT tests as well..

The first lab-confirmed case of COVID-19 re-infection case was detected in Hong Kong using a genomic analysis approach
146
, after which additional re-infection cases were detected in Belgium, Ecuador, and the US
147–149
. Phylogenetic analyses of longitudinal SARS-CoV-2 genomic sequences for all these patients distinguished between patient re-infection and persistent viral shedding from the initial infection. The findings in all four cases suggest that SARS-CoV-2 may persist in the global human population, despite herd immunity due to natural infection, which can complicate vaccine development and efficacy
146
. However, current data suggests that SARS-CoV-2 re-infection is rare, and it has been proposed that immunity against reinfection can last for at least several months after the primary infection
150
..

Clinical manifestations of SARS-CoV-2 infection vary greatly, ranging from a lack of symptoms to irreversible pulmonary damage
151–153
. Adaptive immune responses, such as early CD8+ and CD4+ T cell responses, have been associated with positive patient outcomes
154
. Next-generation sequencing of T and B cell receptor repertoires from COVID-19 patients has also revealed differences in immune response characteristics between patients with a mild or severe disease course
155
. Schultheiß et al. detected more than 14 million T and B receptors from blood samples of infected patients from 70 time points, compiling a valuable resource that can inform new therapeutic approaches and vaccine development. For example, their study revealed that knowledge of host immunopathology obtained through sequencing can permit the early detection of clinical biomarkers and aid in the identification of patients at risk for severe disease
155
..

Many SARS-CoV-2 genomic studies to date have been conducted in the absence of substantial clinical data collection and/or integration with viral sequence data. Conversely, numerous studies have critically evaluated extensive clinical data alone, without assessing corresponding genomic data
156
. Even investigations yielding large genomic (e.g., GISAID
28,36
) and clinical datasets
157
 have not performed integrated analyses of both data types. This substantial limitation of current practices results from distinctions between the fields of bioinformatics (genomic data analyses) and medical informatics (clinical data analyses). The COVID-19 pandemic promises to unite researchers from both of these fields to integrate these seemingly disparate data sources, especially in prospective studies
158
. Finding significant associations between genomic and clinical features of the virus will ultimately support more targeted interventions by public health officials..

The unprecedented density and volume of available SARS-CoV-2 genomic and clinical data enabled the prompt and effective characterization of both SARS-CoV-2 genomes and COVID-19 epidemiology compared to those of previous outbreaks. The numerous successful efforts across various parts of the globe utilizing genomic data for addressing the COVID-19 outbreak created a solid foundation for the standardization of using SARS-CoV-2 genomic data. High-income countries sequenced more SARS-CoV-2 sequences per population than the countries with low, middle-low and middle income. However, the countries of Africa with low and middle-low income demonstrated remarkably better preparedness to collect SARS-CoV-2 genomes than low and middle-low income countries from other continents (Figure 1b). This preparedness can be attributed to previous global initiatives to support African countries in mitigating previous outbreaks of other viruses that ended up in growing sequencing capacity of the region. Africa provides remarkable examples of the necessity of international cooperation which should be implemented in other parts of the globe for better control of worldwide epidemiology..

At the same time, the unprecedented volume of SARS-CoV-2 genome sequencing that reached one million viral genomes sequences challenged the current practices of viral data storage, processing, and bioinformatics analysis
159–161
. While the importance of genome-based viral surveillance systems was widely recognized, the principle of such systems were conceptualized, and there were technological burdens of creating them, as such systems were still in the early stages of development before the pandemic started. However, the unprecedented mobilization of financial, scientific, and development resources during the course of COVID-19 allowed for fast development, deployment, and scaling of numerous global surveillance systems which provide resources for outbreak response using SARS-CoV-2 genome analysis (Table 1)..

When rigorously studied, benchmarked, and standardized, viral genomic surveillance systems enable reliable and timely detection of the presence of circulating and emerging pathogens similar to SARS-CoV-2, providing us a robust shield from current and newly emerging outbreaks
162
. With sufficient sampling, genomic analysis will enable sentinel surveillance efforts capable of effectively locating the geographic source of outbreaks, elucidating transmission chains, and ultimately limiting the spread of the pathogens globally
99,141,163–167
..

We thank William M. Switzer and Ellsworth M. Campbell from the Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, 30333 GA, USA for useful discussions and suggestions. We also thank numerous anonymous reviewers who helped improve our manuscript by their valuable comments on the manuscript..

S.M. was partially supported by National Science Foundation grants 2041984. Tommy Lam is supported by NSFC Excellent Young Scientists Fund (Hong Kong and Macau) (31922087) and Health and Medical Research Fund (COVID190223). Pavel Skums was supported by the National Institutes of Health grant 1R01EB025022. Malak Abedalthagafi MA a acknowledge King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology and the Saudi Human Genome Project for technical and financial support (https://shgp.kacst.edu.sa) Nicholas Wu: startup funds from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Adam Smith: acknowledge funding from NSF grant no. 2029025. Alex Zelikovsky: A.Z. has been partially supported by NSF Grant CCF-1619110 and NIH Grant 1R01EB025022-01. Sergey Knyazev S.K. has been partly supported by Molecular Basis of Disease at Georgia State University. Rob Knight: NSF project 2038509, RAPID: Improving QIIME 2 and UniFrac for Viruses to Respond to COVID-19. CDC project 30055281 with Scripps led by Kristian Andersen, Genomic sequencing of SARS-CoV-2 to investigate local and cross-border emergence and spread..


Initial SARS-CoV-2 virus detection and characterization. Genomic analysis conducted on respiratory specimens isolated from the first COVID-19 patients hospitalized in December, 2019, in Wuhan, China, allowed for the prompt detection and characterization of a novel coronavirus, later named SARS-CoV-2, by January 2020
3,4,9,10
. Initial sequence analyses revealed that SARS-CoV-2 shared 80% nucleotide identity with SARS-CoV
11,12
, strongly indicating that SARS-CoV-2 was likely a respiratory pathogen that could spread from human to human and hence with clear epidemic potential. These initial analyses also revealed that SARS-CoV-2 shared high sequence similarity with related viruses found in bats and pangolins, suggesting a zoonotic origin
10,11,13–19
. Across its complete genome, SARS-CoV-2 is most closely related to the bat coronavirus RaTG13, with which it shares approximately 96% nucleotide sequence identity. However, different SARS-CoV-2 coding regions share greater similarity to those of other animal coronaviruses..


The role of genomics in the early COVID-19 outbreak response. Early access to SARS-CoV-2 genome sequences allowed for the timely development and production of nucleic acid amplification testing (NAAT)-based diagnostics, expedited vaccine development, and accelerated opportunities for SARS-CoV-2 genomics-based, real-time surveillance
27–32
. By April 7, 2021, public repositories that host SARS-CoV-2 genomes contained over 1,000,000 genomes
36–38
 (Table S1). Notably, by the end of the sixth month of the pandemic (May 2020), Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data (GISAID) and the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) databases included 110,000 SARS-CoV-2 full-length genome sequences as compared to more than the 8,000 HIV full-length genome sequences collected by the Los Alamos sequence National Laboratory
39
 over the past 40 years
40
 (Figure 1a)..


SARS-CoV-2 genomic evolution. The unprecedented scale of SARS-CoV-2 genome sequencing offers unique opportunities for tracking SARS-CoV-2 evolution online and detecting the emergence and spread of new variants of interest (VOI) and variants of concern VOC
42–44
 (Figure 2). Coronaviruses undergo a mean rate of approximately 1.12 x 10-3 nucleotide substitutions per site per year. This is comparable to the SARS-CoV-1 mutation rate from 0.8 x 10-3 to 2.38 x 10-3, Ebolavirus's mutation rate of 1.3 x 10-3 and is lower than seasonal influenza mutation rate of 6.7 x 10-3 and HIV mutation rate of 4.4 x 10-3 
45–47,50–52
. However, during the first year and a half of SARS-CoV-2 evolution there 3 VOI and 5 VOC appeared in the world..


The use of genomics to investigate the pandemic spread of SARS-CoV-2. Online tracking of changes in SARS-CoV-2 genomes allows for detecting viral transmission routes. Genomic analysis has allowed the identification of SARS-CoV-2 introduction into Europe from China, into the US from both China and Europe with a subsequent local transmission
91,95–97
. We have collected around 40 outbreak investigations available in the literature that illustrates the usability of genomic analysis for tracking pathogen spread routes..


Monitoring SARS-CoV-2 transmission through wastewater genomic studies. SARS-CoV-2 is regularly shed in feces
113
 that allows surveying the COVID-19 epidemiology by testing wastewater samples. That allows estimating the number of COVID-19 cases, the prevalence of the lineages in the region, and detecting new viral variants. We have collected over 35 studies in 17 countries that used wastewater studies for detecting the presence and concentration of viruses in wastewater
114
 and estimate the relative number of disease cases in the area covered by the sewage facilities..


Genomics in clinical applications. Viral genomics aids in detecting how viral evolution impacts clinical outcomes and treatment
136
. For example, SARS-CoV-2 lineages that have been linked to phenotypic changes that could influence outbreak dynamics and clinical outcomes were declared as VOIs and VOCs. Genomics also helps to control over antigenic drift that can influence vaccines and test efficiency. This provides an opportunity to proactively adapt vaccines and tests to ongoing SARS-CoV-2 genome changes..


Integrating clinical and genomics viral genomics data. Many SARS-CoV-2 genomic studies to date have been conducted in the absence of substantial clinical data collection. Conversely, numerous studies have critically evaluated extensive clinical data alone, without assessing corresponding genomic data
156
. This substantial limitation of current practices results from distinctions between the fields of bioinformatics (genomic data analyses) and medical informatics (clinical data analyses). The COVID-19 pandemic promises to unite researchers from both of these fields to integrate these seemingly disparate data sources, especially in prospective studies
158
..

(a) The number of global SARS-CoV-2 genomes sequenced according to Global Initiative On Sharing All Influenza Data (GISAID) between January 2020-March 2020. (b) The number of available SARS-CoV-2 sequences in GISAID per 1 million (1M) individuals for each country vs. the number of cases per capita up to March 2021. (c) The number of available SARS-CoV-2 sequences in GISAID per 1 million (1M) individuals for each country in Africa vs. the number of sequencers per capita up to March 2021. Blue line is a correlation line of all data points on the plot (d) The number of available SARS-CoV-2 sequences in GISAID per number of reported COVID-19 cases for each country vs. the number of reported COVID-19 cases per capita up to March 2021. (e) Global outbreak investigations by phylogenetic analysis (red) and wastewater studies (yellow), dots were placed in the geographical centers of each county or region..

(a) The locations where VOCs and VOIs were initially detected. (b) The timeline showing when VOCs and VOIs initially appeared in the sequencing data (not the time when they were declared as VOCs and VOIs)..

