Since little is known about viral and host characteristics of breakthrough infections after COVID-19 vaccination, a nationwide investigation of breakthrough cases was initiated in Japan. 130 cases (90%+ received mRNA vaccines) were reported with respiratory specimens in 117 cases and sera in 68 cases. A subset of cases shed infectious virus regardless of symptom presence or viral lineages. Viral lineages for breakthrough infections matched both temporally and spatially with the circulating lineages in Japan with no novel mutations in spike receptor binding domain that may have escaped from vaccine-induced immunity were found. Anti-spike/neutralizing antibodies of breakthrough infections in the acute phase owing to vaccine-induced immunity were significantly higher than those from unvaccinated convalescent individuals but were comparable to vaccinated uninfected individuals, and followed by boosting in the convalescent phase. Symptomatic cases had low anti-spike/neutralizing antibodies in the acute phase with robust boosting in the convalescent phase, suggesting the presence of serological correlate for symptom development in COVID-19 vaccine breakthrough infections..

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has resulted in significant morbidity and mortality globally
1
, but multiple effective vaccines have been developed and authorized for use at an unprecedented speed
2–4
. In Japan, BNT162b2 (Pfizer/BioNTech) was initially approved on February 14, 2021 with two doses three weeks apart, and roll-out started for healthcare workers on February 17, 2021
5
. mRNA-1273 (Moderna) was approved on May 21, 2021 with two doses four weeks apart, and roll-out has started for the elderly. AZD1222 (AstraZeneca) was also approved but is not yet administered under the Immunization Act. As of June 30, 2021, almost all healthcare workers, 37.1% of people over 65, and 9.3% of the general population had been vaccinated twice
6
..

Since several approved vaccines have extraordinarily high efficacy
2–4
, there has been scarce opportunity to study viral and host characteristics in breakthrough cases. Therefore, since late March 2021, the National Institute of Infectious Diseases (NIID) in Japan has initiated a nationwide COVID-19 vaccine breakthrough investigation with 3 objectives: (1) to study viral and host characteristics in breakthrough cases, (2) to detect mutations and/or variants that may have escaped from vaccine-induced immunity or emerged under selective pressure, and (3) to detect outbreaks among vaccinees. Here we present a report of 130 cases identified in this investigation. A standardized case report form (CRF) was used to collect information on patients’ characteristics. Respiratory samples were collected for viral isolation, PCR screening for N501Y, E484K, and L452R mutations, and viral genome sequencing. Sera were also collected to detect antibody response against vaccination and subsequent infection..

136 cases were reported during the study period; 4 cases were excluded because specimens for diagnosis were collected <14 days after the first dose, and 2 cases were excluded for having no vaccination date for the first dose. Thus, the final analysis included 130 cases (63 partially vaccinated and 67 fully vaccinated) from 27 of the 47 prefectures in Japan. Case characteristics are described in Table 1. Median age was 44.5 (range 20-98) with 37 males (28.5%). No cases had a history of primary/acquired immunodeficiency, but 3 individuals were using immunosuppressants. 121 cases were vaccinated with BNT162b2, 2 with mRNA-1273, 1 with AZD1222 (vaccinated overseas), and 6 with unknown (5 were healthcare workers who likely received BNT162b2). Of the 94 cases vaccinated twice with BNT162b2, 86 (91.5%) had a dose interval between 19-23 days. At the time of CRF submission, 65 (50%) were asymptomatic, 60 (46.2%) were mild, and 5 (3.8%) were moderate/severe (3 requiring oxygen supplementation). None required intubation or treatment in the intensive care unit..

Respiratory specimens were collected for 117 cases (59 fully vaccinated), including 74 nasopharyngeal swabs, 40 saliva samples, and 3 nasal swabs. 94 (80.3%) were samples taken for diagnosis, while others were retaken for this investigation. 75 of the 117 cases (34 fully vaccinated) had detectable SARS-CoV-2 RNA during in-house retest. Quantification cycle (Cq) values were similar between partially vaccinated cases and fully vaccinated cases (Fig. 1a). Although the results may be confounded by case demographics, there was no significant difference in viral RNA levels between these two groups in this study..

Among 72 cases (32 fully-vaccinated) with enough samples for viral isolation and titration, 20 (6 fully-vaccinated) had viable virus evaluated by cytopathic effect followed by RT-qPCR confirmation. Viral titers in the respiratory specimens with viable virus were as high as 3.2×104 TCID50/mL with correlation between viral RNA levels and viral titers observed for both fully- and partially-vaccinated cases (Fig. 1b, and 1c). There was no apparent difference in viral titers between fully- and partially-vaccinated cases. Of note, 6 individuals who shed infectious virus were asymptomatic and lineages included B.1.1.7 (Alpha variant), B.1.617.2 (Delta variant), and R.1 (includes E484K mutation; neither VOC or variant of interest; WHO nomenclature not designated)..

RT-qPCR screening for N501Y, E484K, or L452R mutations was done for 75 cases (Table 2). Viral genome sequencing was successfully performed for 48 cases (19 fully vaccinated): 34 cases of B.1.1.7 (Alpha variant), 9 cases of B.1.617.2 (Delta variant), 4 cases of R.1, and 1 case of P.1 (Gamma variant) were found (Table 2). Confirmed lineages based on sequencing and presumed lineages inferred from mutation-specific PCR were plotted by week of specimen collection of 68 cases for all of Japan (Extended Data Fig. 1), as well as for Eastern Japan (Fig. 1d) and Western Japan (Fig. 1f). We compared these breakthrough lineages with lineages detected in samples submitted to the COVID-19 Genomic Surveillance Network in Japan (COG-JP), which is a consortium of public health institute, airport quarantine stations, and NIID. COG-JP has a wide geographical coverage in Japan, but cases of B.1.1.7 (Alpha variant) are likely to be overrepresented as samples that test positive with RT-qPCR detecting N501Y at public health institutes were sequenced preferentially during the study period. On the other hand, since RT-qPCR detecting L452R screening was expanded in mid-late June, 2021, the proportion of B.1.617.2 (Delta variant) is likely to be underestimated in COG-JP. To complement this, based on L452R screening done at commercial laboratories, the proportion of L452R mutations was estimated to be 37% in Eastern Japan but only 5.8% in Western Japan as of June 30
7
. In Eastern Japan, several lineages were detected among breakthrough cases depending on dominant lineages in each time period (R.1 in late March to early May, B.1.617.2 (Delta variant) after late May, and B.1.1.7 (Alpha variant) for the entire period) (Fig. 1e). In Western Japan, as B.1.1.7 (Alpha variant) was introduced in early January and quickly became dominant (Fig. 1g), we only detected B.1.1.7 (Alpha variant) among breakthrough cases. Since there is reasonable concern that the virus may have escaped from vaccine-induced immunity or emerged under selective pressure, we looked at point mutations/deletions in the RBD of the spike protein, which is considered to play a key role in determining antigenicity of the virus
8
. There was no novel mutation in RBD except for lineage-defining mutations (i.e., mutations generally observed in each lineage)..

To explore the hypothesis that vaccine breakthrough cases may have insufficient antibody response from vaccination and subsequent infection, we examined antibody response in 68 cases. 21 cases had samples from the acute phase (0-5 days since diagnosis; more accurately, days since collection of the first positive specimen), while 61 cases had samples from the convalescent phase (7-53 days since diagnosis), including 14 cases with paired samples. When antibody response was plotted by time since diagnosis or symptom onset, anti-nucleocapsid (N) antibodies, induced not by mRNA/viral vector-based COVID-19 vaccine but by infection, were not detectable in the acute phase, but gradually increased over time (Fig. 2a, and 2d). On the other hand, anti-spike (S) and neutralizing antibodies, which can be induced by both vaccination and infection, were highly detectable from the acute phase of breakthrough infection (Fig. 2b, 2c, 2e, and 2f). We further compared antibody response among breakthrough infections with two control groups: unvaccinated individuals who have recovered from asymptomatic or mild infection (19-118 days after first PCR positive results) and vaccinated health workers who have never tested positive with PCR and tested negative for anti-N antibodies (24-38 days after second dose). Anti-N antibodies increased to the same level as unvaccinated convalescent individuals on average (Fig. 3a), but small proportion of cases (8 of 34 (26.5%)) did not seroconvert even after 14 days since diagnosis. Anti-S and neutralizing antibodies in the acute phase of breakthrough infection among fully-vaccinated individuals were significantly higher than those from unvaccinated convalescent individuals, but were comparable to post-vaccinated individuals without infection (Fig. 3b, and 3c). In the convalescent phase, fully-vaccinated breakthrough cases had increased titer to a level higher than post-vaccinated individuals without infection. These results held true for breakthrough cases among partially-vaccinated individuals except that the titer in the convalescent phase was higher than post-vaccinated individuals for neutralizing antibodies but not anti-S antibodies (Extended data Fig. 2). There was one partially vaccinated individual who did not develop anti-S and neutralizing antibodies in the acute phase but had detectable antibodies in the convalescent phase. Finally, we compared antibody response between asymptomatic and symptomatic breakthrough cases. In the acute phase, anti-S and neutralizing antibodies were lower among symptomatic cases than asymptomatic cases although the difference was not statistically significant (Fig. 3e, and 3f). Both anti-S and neutralizing antibodies showed significantly boosting from acute to convalescent phase for symptomatic cases, but not for asymptomatic cases because the titers were already quite high in the acute phase. This was in contrast to anti-N antibody response where significant increase was observed from acute to convalescent phase for both asymptomatic and symptomatic cases (Fig. 3d)..

Here we present a comprehensive assessment of baseline demographics, viral characteristics, and host antibody responses among COVID-19 vaccine breakthrough infections. Fully vaccinated individuals were mostly younger and partially vaccinated individuals were bimodal (younger and elderly), reflecting the priority allocation of vaccines to healthcare workers, followed by the elderly. The male-to-female ratio of breakthrough cases was approximately 1:3, which was comparable to individuals under 65 reported to have been vaccinated between April 12 and April 25, 2021 (presumably healthcare workers) 
6
. There were no immunocompromised individuals and only a few cases of immunosuppressant use..

Some respiratory specimens were shown to contain infectious virus even among fully vaccinated individuals and asymptomatic individuals, indicating that the vaccine breakthrough cases have the potential to cause secondary transmission via respiratory droplets regardless of presence/absence of symptoms or viral lineage..

We next found that the virus detected among breakthrough cases matched the viruses circulating both temporally and spatially. Several reports have suggested increased breakthrough rates of SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern and variants with mutations known to escape antibodies in vitro

9–10
. In our investigation, when there was major transmission of the R.1 lineage, which contains the E484K mutation (known to escape antibodies in vitro

11
), we saw several breakthrough cases with this lineage. However, once B.1.1.7 (Alpha variant), followed by B.1.617.2 (Delta variant), neither of which contain the E484K mutation, became dominant over time due to their high transmissibility
12
, we ceased to see breakthrough cases with R.1 lineages. Instead, we started to observe B.1.1.7 (Alpha variant) and B.1.617.2 (Delta variant), despite the fact that major changes in antigenicity are not expected in these lineages, especially for B.1.1.7 (Alpha variant). Therefore, the occurrence of vaccine breakthrough cases may be defined by the interplay between transmissibility and antigenicity of the variants. The relative importance of antigenicity is likely to become more apparent when a greater proportion of the population is vaccinated..

We also examined individual spike mutations for cases where full viral genome was available as there has also been a reasonable concern that vaccine may positively select for the virus that escape immunity. Our investigation scheme was robust in detecting novel spike RBD mutations as most breakthrough cases appeared independently during community transmission throughout Japan, but no novel RBD mutation was found besides lineage-defining ones. A few case reports describe novel spike mutations that are not found in respective lineages among vaccinated individuals
10, 13
, but the likelihood of occurrence of novel RBD mutation may not be high even among breakthrough cases. Finally, we explored the host immune response in breakthrough cases and found that anti-S and neutralizing antibody levels were high from the acute phase of breakthrough infection, which were far more than what was observed for asymptomatic/mild cases in unvaccinated individuals and was comparable with the response seen in vaccinated individuals without infection. This response cannot be explained by infection itself, and indeed, we saw significantly higher antibody levels in the convalescent phase than in vaccinated individuals without infection. Although we were not able to obtain pre-infection serum samples to confirm that these individuals had antibodies before infection, and thus cannot exclude the possibility that these individuals had swift antibody response before diagnosis, these results demonstrate that breakthrough cases can occur among individuals with robust antibody response at least through breakthrough infection and that breakthrough cases were not occurring among vaccine non-responders. We also noted that the anti-N antibodies were not detected in some convalescent sera after breakthrough infection. This may be due to early viral clearance leading to non-seroconversion
14
 and suggests that the sole use of anti-N antibodies to detect breakthrough cases may not be suitable. We further observed that symptomatic cases had marginally lower anti-S and neutralizing antibody titers in the acute phase compared to asymptomatic cases with significant increase in titers from acute to convalescent phase to the level comparable to asymptomatic cases. These results collectively suggest that symptomatic cases have insufficient anti-S and neutralizing antibody titer to prevent symptom development in the pre-infection phase. The potential usefulness of neutralizing antibody as a correlate of protection has been implicated
15, 16
, but further studies exploring antibody response among vaccinated individuals pre- and post-breakthrough infection will be urgently needed..

There are at least five limitations in this study. First, although the study was a public health investigation at the national level, the case series comprised only a part of breakthrough cases in Japan (approximately one-third of fully vaccinated cases notified in HER-SYS). Also, the cases mostly consisted of healthcare workers, and therefore are not representative of the population in Japan. Secondly, as samples were not collected specifically for this investigation, storage and transportation may not have been ideal and some specimens were collected at a later time, resulting in 42 cases (36%) with no detectable viral RNA upon retest at NIID, although low viral RNA load may also be a hallmark of breakthrough cases
17
. Thirdly, there was no data on when these individuals were exposed to the virus and the immune status at the time of contact was unknown. Fourthly, we did not assess SARS-CoV-2-specific T-cell response, which contributes to protection when antibody titers are low in non-human primate models
17
. Finally, our investigation does not evaluate the effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines and should not be used to undermine the importance of vaccination, which is a critical tool in the effort to end the COVID-19 pandemic..

Overall, the current study aimed to provide a comprehensive understanding of both viral and host factors. Our results indicate that COVID-19 vaccine breakthrough cases occur through infection of circulating strains even among cases with robust antibody response early in the course of infection. Although we have not detected any novel variant that escaped mutation thus far, we must stay vigilant for emergence of these variants. In order to achieve this, it is important to continue to test suspect cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection regardless of their vaccination status, and to attempt to perform sequencing on a subset of these cases. At the same time, until community transmission subsides, appropriate infection prevention measures, based on recommendations from public health authorities, are warranted for each individual regardless of vaccination status, as the probability of emergence of novel variants of concern increases as the virus has more opportunities to transmit and mutate..

Demographic data and respiratory samples were collected as part of public health activity under the Infectious Diseases Control Law. Blood specimens were collected for clinical testing provided by NIID with patient consent and retrospective analysis was done as a research activity with ethics approval (NIID ethics committee approval number 1275). Serology data for recovered cases and post-vaccinated individuals without SARS-CoV-2 infection are also included from other studies (NIID ethics committee approval numbers 1245, 1273). Preliminary results of the public health activity portion (case characteristics/respiratory specimen analysis) were published in Japanese on the MHLW/NIID websites to meet statutory requirements
18
..

In this investigation, a “partially vaccinated” individual was defined as an individual who had a positive result from a test detecting SARS-CoV-2 RNA or antigen on a respiratory specimen collected ≥14 days after the first dose when multiple doses are required as a primary series under approved conditions (e.g., BNT162b2 and mRNA-1273). A “fully vaccinated” individual was defined as an individual who had a positive result from a test detecting SARS-CoV-2 RNA or antigen on a respiratory specimen collected ≥14 days after the second dose..

On March 30, 2021, an Office Memorandum was released from the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare (MHLW) to request healthcare facilities, local health centers, and public health institutes to send specimens from partially vaccinated and fully vaccinated cases to NIID. The Health Center Real-time information-sharing System on COVID-19 (HER-SYS), which is a platform for the legal notification of COVID-19 in Japan, was utilized as support to detect fully vaccinated cases for inclusion in this investigation. Blood specimens could also be submitted concurrently for antibody testing as part of clinical practice upon physicians’ request. An example of the CRF can be found in the Supplementary Table. Respiratory specimens can be either sputum, tracheal aspirate, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, oropharyngeal swab, nasal aspirate, nasal swab, nasopharyngeal swab, or saliva. Blood specimens were either serum or plasma. Quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) was done at NIID for all respiratory samples received using NIID-N2 primer/probe set
19
 to confirm that the sample quality was suitable for subsequent testing. In this report, all cases reported from April 1 to June 30, 2021 were included..

Viral isolation and PCR screening for mutations of interest, specifically N501Y, E484K, and L452R, were attempted for NIID-N2 primer/probe set positive samples. Viral isolation was attempted for all quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) positive cases with available residual specimens as described previously
20
. Briefly, VeroE6/TMPRSS2 cells were seeded in 96-well flat-bottom plates, respiratory specimen mixed with Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 2% FBS and Antibiotic-Antimycotic (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA USA) was inoculated in duplicate, culture supernatant was changed to fresh medium on 1 day post-infection (d.p.i.) and incubated at 37 °C supplied with 5% CO2. On 1, 3, and 5 d.p.i., cytopathic effect (CPE) was observed. After 5 d.p.i., supernatant was collected and RT-qPCR using SARS-CoV-2 direct detection RT-qPCR kit (Takara Bio, Shiga, Japan) was performed to confirm the propagation of SARS-CoV-2. For samples with indeterminate RT-qPCR results, blind passage was done for further attempt at isolation. Median tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50) in the residual specimens was determined for all viral isolation positive cases..

For respiratory specimens with adequate RNA, whole genome sequencing of SARS-CoV-2 was attempted. Whole genome sequences of SARS-CoV-2 were obtained by PrimalSeq protocol to enrich cDNA of the SARS-CoV-2 genome by multiplex RT-qPCR amplicons using a modified version of the multiplexed PCR primer set which was originally proposed by Wellcome Trust ARTIC Network
21–22
. Briefly, PCR products were purified and subjected to Illumina library construction using QIAseq FX DNA Library Kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany). NextSeq 500 platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) was used for sequencing the indexed libraries. The NGS reads were mapped to the SARS-CoV-2 Wuhan-Hu-1 reference genome sequence (29.9 kb ss-RNA; GenBank ID: MN908947), resulting in the specimen-specific SARS-CoV-2 genome sequence by fully mapping on the reference. These mapped reads of SARS-CoV-2 sequences were assembled using A5-miseq v.20140604 to determine the full genome sequence. The SNV sites and marked heterogeneity were extracted by read-mapping at ≥10 × depth and the region from 99 to 29,796 nt of the Wuhan-Hu-1 genome sequence..

We used three assays to detect vaccine-induced and infection-induced antibodies. First, we used widely used commercial electrochemiluminescence immunoassays to detect binding antibodies against nucleocapsid protein (Elecsys Anti-SARS-CoV-2 (Roche)) and receptor binding domain of spike protein (Elecsys Anti-SARS-CoV-2 S (Roche)). A cutoff value of 0.8 U/mL as determined by the manufacturer was used to determine the presence/absence of anti-spike antibodies. A cutoff value determined by the manufacturer is 1.0U/mL, but a different cutoff of 0.128 as proposed by Public Health England was used for anti-nucleocapsid antibodies (both cutoffs are shown in the figures) 
23
. With these cutoffs, assays have adequate sensitivity (N: 99.4% against PCR-positive samples 20+ days post-symptom onset and S: 97.7% against PCR-positive samples 14+ days post-symptom onset) and specificity (N: 98.1% and S:100% both against PCR-negative samples) through external evaluation by Public Health England
24–25
. Past reports also provide insight into the usefulness of detecting anti-spike antibodies among individuals vaccinated with BNT162b2 using Elecsys Anti-SARS-CoV-2 S (Roche) 
26
..

We also conducted authentic virus neutralization assay to detect functional antibodies. Briefly, a mixture of 100 TCID50 virus (Wuhan strain; hCoV-19/Japan/TY-WK-521/2020; GISAID ID: EPI_ISL_408667) and serially diluted antibodies (2-fold serial dilutions starting at 1:5 dilution diluted with high glucose DMEM supplemented with 2% FBS and 100 U/mL penicillin/streptomycin) was incubated at 37 °C for 1 hour before being placed on VeroE6/TMPRSS2 cells seeded in 96-well flat-bottom plates. After culturing for 4–6 days at 37 °C supplied with 5% CO2, cells were fixed with 20% formalin (Fujifilm Wako Pure Chemical Corporation, Osaka, Japan) and stained with crystal violet solution (Sigma-Aldrich, Burlington, MA, USA). Neutralization titer of samples below the detection limit (1:5 dilution) was set as 2.5. We also used First WHO International Standard Anti-SARS-CoV-2 Immunoglobulin (NIBSC code 20/13) to convert our neutralization titer to International Units per milliliter (IU/mL), which showed that a neutralization titer of 113 was equal to 1000 IU/mL (meaning that IU/mL can be estimated if a neutralization titer is multiplied by 8.85)..

Data analysis was done using Microsoft Excel, GraphPad Prism, and R. For statistical analysis, Student’s t test was used to compare Cq values, Mann-Whitney test was used to compare virus titer, and Kruskal-Wallis test and post-hoc Dunn’s test was used to compare antibody titers. P-values of less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant..


a, the number of confirmed lineages based on sequencing and presumed SARS-CoV-2 lineages inferred from RT-qPCR detecting N501Y, E484K, or L452R mutations plotted by week of specimen collection of first positive samples for all of Japan..


b, the number of confirmed lineages in samples submitted to COG-JP by week of specimen collection for all of Japan..


a-c, the levels of anti-nucleocapsid (a), anti-spike (b), and neutralizing (c) antibodies in COVID-19 vaccine breakthrough cases among partially vaccinated individuals in the acute phase and convalescent phase with two control groups: unvaccinated individuals who have recovered from asymptomatic or mild infection (19-118 days after first PCR positive results) and vaccinated health workers who have never tested positive with PCR and tested negative for anti-nucleocapsid antibodies (24-38 days after second dose)..

Black bars indicate geometric means with 95% confidence interval. Numbers shown on top are geometric mean titers. * denotes statistical significance while ns indicates non-significance. Dotted lines indicate cutoff values..

This work was supported in part a grant from the Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development (AMED) (Grant Numbers by JP19fk0108104 to TS and YT, JP20fk0108104 to TS and YT, and JP21fk0108534 to YT).We thank the following healthcare facilities, local health centers, and public health institutes for their contribution in providing us with valuable patient information and samples: Aki Health Center, Aomori Jikeikai Hospital, Aso Onsen Hospital, Chiba City Institute of Health and Environment, Chiba Prefectural Institute of Public Health, Chuhoku Branch Office for Public Health and Welfare, Fujimino Emergency Hospital, Fukuoka City Hospital, Gifu City Public Health Center, Gifu Prefectural Research Institute for Health and Environmental Sciences, Gunma Saiseikai Maebashi Hospital, Hachioji City Public Health Center, Hakodate City Institute of Public Health, Hakodate Public Health Center, Hyogo Prefectural Institute of Public Health Science, Ikegami General Hospital, IMS Sapporo Digestive Disease Center General Hospital, Inba Health and Welfare Center, International University of Health and Welfare Hospital, Ishikawa Prefectural Central Hospital, Ishikawa Prefecture Health and Welfare Department, Ishikawa Prefectural Institute of Public Health and Environmental Science, Itami City Hospital, Japanese Red Cross Gifu Hospital, Japanese Red Cross Kanazawa Hospital, Japanese Red Cross Narita Hospital, JCHO Kanazawa Hospital, JCHO Nankai Medical Center, Juntendo University Hospital, Kaga Medical Center, Kasai Clinic (Osaka), Kashiwa Public Health Center, Keio University Hospital, Keiwakai Ebetsu Hospital, Kitakyushu Public Health Center, Kitakyushu Public Health Institute, Kobe City Nishi-Kobe Medical Center, Kobe Ekisaikai Hospital, Komatsu Municipal Hospital, Koriyama City Public Health Center, Kumamoto City Hospital, Kurume-shi Public Health Center, Kyoritsu Narashinodai Hospital, Kyoto Kujo Hospital, Kyoto Prefectural Institute of Public Health and Environment, Kyowakai Kyoritsu Hospital, Maebashi-shi Public Health Center, Makita General Hospital, Minami Kaga Health and Welfare Center, Mizushima Kyodo Hospital, Nagano Environmental Conservation Research Institute, Nanbu Tokushukai Hospital, Nanshu Orthopedics Hospital, National Hospital Organization Kyoto Medical Center, National Hospital Organization Osaka National Hospital, Niigata City Health Center, Nippon Medical School Chiba Hokusoh Hospital, Obihiro Dai-ichi Hospital, Obihiro Health Center, Oita City Public Health Center, Oita Kouseiren Tsurumi Hospital, Oita Prefectural Institute of Health and Environment, Okayama Kyoritsu Hospital, Saiseikai Kanazawa Hospital, Saiseikai Yamaguchi Hospital, Saitama City Hospital, Saitama Nishi Kyodo Hospital, Sakura Hospital (Kumamoto), Sapporo Public Health Office, Sasebo City General Hospital, Shibuya Clinic (Ishikawa), Shimonoseki City Hospital, Shimonoseki Public Health Center, Suginami Public Health Center, Takasaki General Public Health Center, Tamashima Central Hospital, Tokyo Medical and Dental University Medical Hospital, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Public Health, Tonan Hospital, Tsuchiya General Hospital, Tsukuba Central Hospital, Tsurukawa Sanatorium Hospital, Ueda Health and Welfare Office, Utsunomiya City Institute of Public Health and Environment, and Yamanashi Prefectural Institute for Public Health and Environment.We thank the COVID-19 Genomic Surveillance Network in Japan (COG-JP) for their contribution in providing baseline genome surveillance information. We thank A. Sataka, M. Virhuez Mendoza, Y. Iwamoto, M. Tokita, Y. Kawai, S. Uchikoba, and H. Takahashi for technical assistance. We also thank M. Hori and O. Kuniko for support from the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, Japan..


Competing interest
.

The authors declare no conflicts of interest..


a, quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) done at NIID for all respiratory samples received using NIID-N2 primer/probe set for cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection among partially-vaccinated or fully-vaccinated individuals..


b, viral titer for cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection among partially-vaccinated or fully-vaccinated individuals..


c, correlation between viral RNA and virus titer..


d, f, the number of confirmed lineages based on sequencing and presumed SARS-CoV-2 lineages inferred from RT-qPCR detecting N501Y, E484K, or L452R mutations plotted by week of specimen collection of first positive samples for Eastern Japan (d) and Western Japan (f)..


e,g, the number of confirmed lineages in samples submitted to Collaboration with local public health institutes in COG-JP by week of specimen collection for Eastern Japan (e) and Western Japan (g). Black bars indicate geometric means with 95% confidence interval. ns indicates non-significance. Dotted line indicates a cutoff value..


a-c, the levels of anti-nucleocapsid (a), anti-spike (b), and neutralizing (c) antibodies by days since diagnosis (time since collection date of the specimen that first tested positive) for 68 cases (21 acute phase samples and 61 convalescent phase samples with 14 paired samples)..


d-f, the levels of anti-nucleocapsid (d), anti-spike (e), and neutralizing (f) antibodies by days since symptom onset for 33 symptomatic cases with known onset date (13 acute phase samples and 29 convalescent phase samples with 9 paired samples)..

Green squares denote partially-vaccinated cases while pink circles denote fully-vaccinated cases. Dotted lines indicate cutoff values..


a-c, the levels of anti-nucleocapsid (a), anti-spike (b), and neutralizing (c) antibodies in COVID-19 vaccine breakthrough cases among fully-vaccinated individuals in the acute phase and convalescent phase with two control groups: unvaccinated individuals who have recovered from asymptomatic or mild infection (19-118 days after first PCR positive results) and vaccinated health workers who have never tested positive with PCR and tested negative for anti-nucleocapsid antibodies (24-38 days after second dose)..


d-f, the comparison of levels of anti-nucleocapsid (d), anti-spike (e), and neutralizing (f) antibodies between asymptomatic and symptomatic COVID-19 vaccine breakthrough cases..

Black bars indicate geometric means with 95% confidence interval. Numbers shown on top are geometric mean titers. Dotted lines indicate cutoff values. Grey horizontal lines in panel e and f indicate geometric mean titer for vaccinated but uninfected individuals as a reference (Post vac.). * denotes statistical significance while ns indicates non-significance..

Severity is based on Japanese guidance (moderate includes cases with shortness of breath with or without oxygen requirement; severe includes cases intubated and/or cases admitted to the intensive care unit).

Includes 3 requiring oxygen use.

Cell death possibly due to cytotoxicity of the contaminants in samples.

