Since the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, there has been a rapid expansion in
vaccine research focusing on exploiting the novel discoveries on the
pathophysiology, genomics, and molecular biology of the severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection. Although the current preventive
measures are primarily socially distancing by maintaining a 1 m distance, it is
supplemented using facial masks and other personal hygiene measures. However,
the induction of vaccines as primary prevention is crucial to eradicating the
disease to attempt restoration to normalcy. This literature review aims to
describe the physiology of the vaccines and how the spike protein is used as a
target to elicit an antibody-dependent immune response in humans. Furthermore,
the overview, dosing strategies, efficacy, and side effects will be discussed
for the notable vaccines: BioNTech/Pfizer, Moderna, AstraZeneca, Janssen,
Gamaleya, and SinoVac. In addition, the development of other prominent COVID-19
vaccines will be highlighted alongside the sustainability of the
vaccine-mediated immune response and current contraindications. As the research
is rapidly expanding, we have looked at the association between pregnancy and
COVID-19 vaccinations, in addition to the current reviews on the mixing of
vaccines. Finally, the prominent emerging variants of concern are described, and
the efficacy of the notable vaccines toward these variants has been
summarized..

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic caused by the
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has resulted in over
192 million cases and 4.1 million deaths as of July 22, 2021.
1
 This pandemic has brought along a massive burden in morbidity and mortality
in the healthcare systems. Despite the implementation of stringent public health
measures, there have been devasting effects in other sectors contributing to our
economy. This has plunged the global economies toward deep recession and has racked
up a debt of approximately 19.5 trillion USD.
2
.

Immune protection in COVID-19 infection can be conceptualized as a spectrum wherein
sterile immunity is at the end of positive spectrum. This is followed by transient
infection (<3 days) and asymptomatic infection (~1 week). The negative spectrum
of immune protection includes patients who are symptomatic, or hospitalized, or
admitted to the intensive care unit for multiorgan support. The extreme end of the
negative spectrum of immune protection is encompassed by case fatality. The vaccine
will intervene prior to the viral insult and stabilize the population at the
positive end of the spectrum of the immune protection. It will also prevent the
perpetuating cycle of infection and reinfection via variants of SARS-CoV-2 virus in
those who have achieved prior convalescence. One study by Dan et
al. showed that in patients infected with COVID-19, immunological
memory to SARS-CoV-2 remained intact for up to 6 months.
3
 Unfortunately, there is no long-term data on the duration of protected
immunity against SARS-CoV-2 in patients after convalescence. Therefore, these
patients may also require vaccination but the current priority for vaccination can
be stretched relative to the unaffected population..

While the ideal goal of the COVID-19 vaccine roll-out is to instill a global herd
immunity; it is important to remember that this goal may never be reached.
Furthermore, additional goals of vaccination may be to reduce mortality and stress
on healthcare systems by reducing the cases of admitted patients. Various countries
have already approved COVID-19 vaccines for human use, and more are expected to be
licensed in the upcoming year. It is important that these vaccines are safe,
efficacious, and can be deployed on a large scale. It is also prudent to eliminate
the concerns of both the scientific and general community regarding its
effectiveness, side-effects, and dosing strategies..

Historically, the process of vaccine manufacturing and clinical trials required
approximately 10 years, but due to the burden of this disease, various observational
studies were expedited so that all crucial information regarding the vaccine
pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, dosing, efficacy, and adverse events can be
collected within a short period of time. Furthermore, there is a need to provide a
compilation of accredited and appraised scientific literature on each of these
approved vaccines with an aim to instill public health knowledge and vaccine
literacy to members of the scientific and general community. A section dedicated to
COVID-19 vaccines and pregnancy is also included in the penultimate section of this
review..

Finally, the emergence of the SARS-CoV-2 viral variants of concern (VOC) has attained
increased replication, transmission, and infectivity warranting exploration of these
genomic mutations as their phenotypes. Hence, the final section of this review will
aim to clarify the jargon, highlight the vaccine efficacy (VE) against VOCs, and
eliminate any misinformation regarding these variants..

The global burden of the pandemic requires an efficacious vaccine
that elicits a lasting protective immune response against SARS-CoV-2. This will be
an essential armament for the prevention and mitigation of the downstream morbidity
and mortality caused by SARS-CoV-2 infection. As of July 20, 2021, there are
approximately 108 vaccines in clinical development and 184 vaccines in pre-clinical
development with several vaccines being distributed globally.
4
.

The technologies employed in the vaccine synthesis and development aim to trigger the
adaptive immune system and elicit memory cells that will protect the body from
subsequent infections. These technologies may be mRNA-based vaccines such as the
Moderna and Pfizer/BioNTech, inactivated virus vector vaccines, DNA vaccines, and
numerous other technologies.
5
.

Due to the urgent implementation of vaccine development, the most obvious target will
be the robust proteins expressed on the surface of the virus. Therefore, these
technologies target molecular expression of the trimeric SARS-CoV-2 spike (S)
glycoprotein. These targets could include its mRNA, DNA, full S1 subunit, or fusion
subunits. The S protein is a major component of the virus envelope, it is vital for
viral fusion, receptor binding, and virus-entry through recognition of host-cellular
receptor. The S protein comprises of two main functional units, the S1 subunit,
which contains the receptor-binding domain (RBD) and the S2 subunit which is
responsible for virus fusion with the host-cell membrane.
6
 The choice to proceed with S protein as the target was reinforced when a
study by Dan et al. confirmed that in 169 patients infected with
SARS-CoV-2, spike-specific immunoglobulin G (IgG) remained stable for over 6 months.
3
 In addition, both spike-specific CD4+ T-cells (CD137+ and OX40+) and
spike-specific CD8+ T-cells (CD69+ and CD137+) were present at the 6-month
post-convalescence period, but their subpopulations exhibited a steady decline with
a half-life of 139 days and 225 days, respectively.
3
.

There are subtle differences in the mechanism by which the different vaccine products
interact within host cells to induce immunity. Many successful vaccines of the 20
century utilized the target proteins directly such as the tetanus and pertussis
vaccine. A summary of the major types of vaccines and their mechanism of action are
shown in Figure 1..

Summary of major vaccine types and their mechanism of action..

DNA, deoxyribonucleic acid; HPV, Human papillomavirus; mRNA, messenger
ribonucleic acid; MMR, Measles, Mumps, and Rubella; SARS-CoV-2, severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2..

Historically, vaccines usually contained adjuvants which are protein sensitizers that
heighten the migratory and sampling response of antigen presenting cells (APCs).
Interestingly, the current mRNA vaccines are engineered to code for their own
sensitizing protein alongside the S-protein epitopes. Therefore, these new mRNA
vaccines usually do not contain any adjuvants. In addition, the mRNA vaccines
utilize lipid nanoparticles to deliver the genetic material of a viral S-protein.
Contrastingly, vaccines such as the AstraZeneca vaccine may employ a chimpanzee
adenovirus vector to carry the DNA genome of the S-protein to the host-cell.
7
 Once undergoing the processes of transcription and translation into proteins,
these are trafficked and expressed on the host cell surface wherein the adaptive
immune system mounts a response via the major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) molecules (Figure
2)..

Mechanism of induction of immunity through vaccination..

APC, antigen presenting cells; DNA, deoxyribonucleic acid; MHC, major
histocompatibility complex; mRNA, messenger ribonucleic acid; SARS-CoV-2,
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2..

There are two types of MHC molecules, the first one that will be discussed is the
MHC-II, which is found exclusively on APC: these comprise of B-cells, macrophages,
and dendritic cells in the lymph nodes. Once the S-protein antigen is presented at
the cell surface of the MHC-II molecules, the naïve helper T-cell’s (Th Cells)
T-cell receptor (TCR) complex will interact with this antigen leading to activation
of CD4+ Th cells. This activation is perpetuated by a secondary activation signal
with B7 on the APC recognizing the CD28 on the Th cell which triggers the
proliferation of Th cells that can recognize the S-protein antigen. Activated CD4+
Th cells then secrete numerous cytokines, namely interleukin (IL)-2 which activates
CD8+ cytotoxic T-cells (Tc cell) and trigger clonal expansion of B-cells in memory
B-cells and plasma cells. The cytokines IL-4 and IL-5 facilitate B-cell isotype
switching and maturation to plasma cells; promoting secretion of IgG antibodies
against S-protein.
8
 Formation of antibodies allows the immune system to direct an immune response
against cells expressing the S-protein of the virus. The second process involves
MHC-I, which activates CD8+ Naïve Tc cells through TCR complex interaction with
processed endogenously synthesized S-protein expressed on MHC-I. MHC-I is expressed
in all nucleated cells, APCs, and platelets and require a second activation signal
provided by IL-2 from activated CD4+ Th cells. This activates CD8+ Tc cells which
can mount a cytotoxic response against SARS-CoV-2-infected cells through two
mechanisms of apoptosis. The first mechanism is the secretion of perforin which
create pores to allow granzyme to enter the targeted cell, thus activating
apoptosis. The second mechanism is via the expression of FasL,
which binds Fas on target cells and induces apoptosis.
8
 A crucial part of this process is the stimulation of memory T-cells and
memory B-cells. Importantly, while the SARS-CoV-2 vaccine’s lasting effect is still
being researched in the context of the pandemic, theoretically these should provide
lasting immunity and allow the immune system to mount a faster and more effective
response should a vaccinated individual encounter the virus in the future..

The BNT162b2 COVID-19 vaccine developed by BioNTech and
Pfizer is a lipid nanoparticle-formulated, nucleoside-modified RNA vaccine that
encodes a prefusion membrane-anchored SARS-CoV-2 full-length spike protein.
9
 It was the first vaccine approved by the US Food and Drug Association
(FDA) and now it has been approved in many other countries.
10
 The BNT162b2 COVID-19 vaccine may be stored at standard refrigerator
temperatures prior to use, but it requires very cold temperatures for long-term
storage and shipping (−70°C) to maintain the stability of the lipid
nanoparticle. In a phase-1 trial, it was compared to another vaccine candidate
BNT162b1, and it was found to have a milder systemic side-effect profile with a
similar antibody response.
11
 Therefore, it was pushed forward to a blinded phase-2/3 clinical study.
9
 In total, 43,548 participants were randomized to receive either two doses
of the BNT162b2 vaccine (n = 21,720) or a placebo (n = 21,728) 21 days apart.
The participant ages ranged from 16 to 91 years, 35.1% of participants were
classified as having obesity and comorbidities within participants included HIV,
malignancy, diabetes, and vascular diseases.
9
 Based on the results of the study, 7 days after the second BNT162b2 dose,
the VE was 95% (95% confidence interval (CI), 90.3–97.6) with only eight
observed cases of COVID-19 in the vaccine recipients and 162 cases in the
placebo recipients.
9
 The efficacy remained consistent across subgroups characterized by age,
sex, race, ethnicity, body mass index (BMI), and comorbidities (generally 90–100%).
9
 Although there were 10 cases of severe COVID-19 with onset after the
first dose, only one occurred in a vaccine recipient and nine in placebo
recipients. Like the phase-1 trial results, the safety profile remained
favorable with the most common local reaction being mild-to-moderate pain at the
injection site while the most common systemic symptoms were fatigue and headache
(reported in ⩾50%).
9
 In both the vaccine and placebo group, the incidence of severe adverse
events did not differ significantly (0.6% and 0.5%, respectively) and no deaths
occurred related to the vaccine. As indicated by the manufacturer’s information,
contraindications for use include hypersensitivity to the active substance or
any of the excipients.
12
 These studies show that the mRNA-vaccine BNT162b2 is safe and effective
in protecting against COVID-19. However, further investigations are needed to
confirm long-term safety and to establish safety and efficacy for populations
not included in this study..

The mRNA-1273 vaccine, developed by Moderna, relies on mRNA
technology to encode prefusion stabilized SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. It is the
second COVID-19 vaccine to receive emergency use approval by the US FDA, and it
is given as two 100-µg doses intramuscularly into the deltoid muscle, 28 days apart.
13
 Storage of the vaccine is done at temperatures between −25°C to −15°C for
long-term storage, 2°C to 8°C for 30 days, or 8°C to 25°C for up to 12 hours.
Results from the COVE phase-3 trial showed that the mRNA-1273 vaccine was
effective at preventing COVID-19 illness in persons 18 years of age or older. A
total of 30,420 participants aged 18 years or older were randomized 1:1 to
receive either two doses of the vaccine or a placebo, 28 days apart.
14
 The mean age of the participants was 51.4 years, and enrollment was
adjusted for equal representation of racial and ethnic minorities. In the trial,
symptomatic COVID-19 illness occurred in 11 participants within the vaccine
group versus 185 participants within the placebo group, showing
a 94.1% (95% CI, 89.3–96.8%) efficacy of the vaccine. Efficacy was similar
across age, sex, race, and ethnicity as well as in patients with and without
risk factors for severe disease (e.g. chronic lung disease, cardiac disease, and
severe obesity). Importantly, a secondary endpoint for determining the efficacy
of the vaccine in preventing severe COVID-19 was also used. All 30 participants
with severe COVID-19 were in the placebo group, indicating a 100% efficacy of no
hospital admissions.
14
 Regarding the side effects of the vaccine, adverse events at the
injection site and systemic adverse events occurred more commonly with the
mRNA-1273 group compared to the placebo. The most common local reaction was mild
to moderate pain at the injection site (75%). The most common systemic symptoms
were fatigue, myalgia, arthralgia, and headache (50%).
14
 The overall incidence of serious adverse events did not differ
significantly between groups and no deaths occurred in relation to the vaccine.
While this vaccine is already being administered, further investigations are
still necessary to establish safety and efficacy profiles for populations not
included in this study as well as to assess its long-term effects. Current
contraindications of the mRNA-1273 vaccine include any persons with known
allergy to polyethylene glycol (PEG), another mRNA vaccine component or polysorbate.
15
.

The Oxford and AstraZeneca ChAdOx1 COVID-19 vaccine uses a
chimpanzee adenovirus vector to deliver the genetic sequence of a full-length
spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 into host cells.
16
 The storage for the ChAdOx1 vaccine is favorable, as it may be
refrigerated at 2°C–8°C for 6 months. Pooled analysis of four ongoing clinical
studies was used to assess efficacy, safety, and immunogenicity of the ChAdOx1
vaccine: COV001 (phase 1/2), COV002 (phase 2/3), COV003 (phase 3), and COV005
(phase 1/2).
17
 Across the four studies participants over 18 were randomized to receive
either the vaccine or a control (meningococcal group A, C, W, or saline).
ChAdOx1 vaccine recipients received two standard doses (SDs) of the vaccine
(SD/SD cohort) except for a subset in the COV002 trial who received a half lower
dose (LD) followed by an SD (LD/SD cohort).
17
 In the four studies, there was a total 23,848 participants, all of whom
were used for gathering safety data; only 11,636 participants from the COV002
and COV003 trials were included in the primary efficacy analysis.
17
 Of the 11,636 participants in the efficacy analysis, 2741 were in the
LD/SD cohort, 88% were between 18 and 55 years old, and comorbidities present
included cardiovascular disease, respiratory disease, and diabetes.
17
 The results show that in the intended dosing regimen (SD/SD cohort), the
VE was 62.1% (95% CI, 41.0–75.7) ⩾14 days after the second injection for
symptomatic COVID-19 (27 cases vs 71 cases respectively).
17
 In the group that received an LD (LD/SD cohort), the VE was 90.0% (95%
CI, 67.4–97.0; 3 cases vs 30 cases, respectively) while across
the two dosing regimens the overall efficacy was 70.4% (95.8% CI, 54.8–80.6;30
cases vs 101 cases, respectively).
17
 The higher efficacy observed in the LD/SD cohort can be attributed to
this group having a longer dosing interval between the two doses in comparison
to the SD/SD cohort. Regarding safety, most of the adverse events were
mild-moderate with the most frequently reported being injection site
pain/tenderness, fatigue, headache, malaise, and myalgia.
18
 About 175 serious adverse events were noted, only three of which were
possibly linked to intervention: transverse myelitis 14 days after second dose,
haemolytic anemia in a control recipient and fever >40°C in a participant
still masked to group allocation. One contraindication for use of the vaccine is
hypersensitivity to any of its components. In very rare cases, AstraZeneca has
been associated internationally with venous thromboembolic events with
thrombocytopenia with current estimates being 10–15 cases per million vaccinated patients.
19
 This adverse event has been termed thrombosis with thrombocytopenia
syndrome (TTS). In summary, these studies demonstrate that the AstraZeneca
ChAdOx1 vaccine has a good efficacy and side-effect profile. Limitations include
that less than 4% of participants were >70, no one over 55 got the mixed-dose
regimen (LD/SD cohort), and those with comorbidities were a minority. Additional
investigations are required to analyze long-term effects and assess efficacy and
safety in populations not included or underrepresented..

The Janssen (Johnson & Johnson) COVID-19 vaccine,
developed by Janssen Pharmaceutical in Netherlands. It is a single-dose
intramuscular (IM) vaccine that contains a recombinant, replication incompetent
human adenovirus (Ad26) vector encoding the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 in the
stabilized conformation.
20
 It can be stored between 2°C and 8°C for up to 6 hours or at room
temperature for a duration of 2 hours. The ENSEMBLE Phase-3 trial (n = 43,783)
is a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study which included
participants ⩾18 years. Efficacy assessment was performed at day 14 and 28. The
primary outcome only included moderate and severe (hospitalization and death)
infection. Overall, the VE in the moderate to severe cohort was 66.9% (95% CI:
59.0–73.4) at 14 days and 66.1% (95% CI: 55.0–74.8) at 28 days.
20
 In the severe cohort, the VE was 76.7% (95% CI: 54.6–89.1) and 85.4% (95%
CI: 54.2–96.9) at day 14 and 28 days, respectively.
20
 At the time of the study, 96.4% of the strains in the United States,
96.4% were identified as the Wuhan-H1 variant D614G. The VE in the United States
for the moderate to severe cohort was 74.4% (95% CI: 65.0–81.6) and 72.0% (95%
CI: 58.2–81.7) at 14 days and 28 days, respectively.
20
 In the US severe cohort, the VE was 78.0% (95% CI: 33.1–94.6) and 85.9%
(95% CI: −9.4 to 99.7) at day 14 and 28 days, respectively.
20
 Alternatively, 94.5% of the strains in South Africa were identified as
beta variant. The VE in South Africa for the moderate to severe cohort was 52.0%
(95% CI: 30.3–67.4) and 64.0% (95% CI: 41.2–78.7) at 14 days and 28 days, respectively.
20
 In the South African severe cohort, the VE was 73.1% (95% CI: 40.0–89.4)
and 81.7% (95% CI: 46.2–95.4) at day 14 and 28 days, respectively.
20
 In Brazil, 69.4% of the strains were identified as P.2 lineage variant
and 30.6% were identified as Wuhan-H1 variant D614G. The VE in Brazil for the
moderate to severe cohort was 66.2% (95% CI: 51.0–77.1) and 68.1% (95% CI:
48.8–80.7) at 14 days and 28 days, respectively.
20
 In the Brazilian severe cohort, the VE was 81.9% (95% CI: 17.0–98.1) and
87.6% (95% CI: 7.8–99.7) at day 14 and 28 days, respectively.
20
 The most common localized solitary adverse reaction was the injection
site pain (48.6%). Conversely, the most common systemic adverse reactions
included headache, fatigue, myalgia, and nausea.
20
 In the post authorization phase, adverse reaction included anaphylaxis,
thrombosis with thrombocytopenia, Guillain Barré syndrome, and capillary leak syndrome.
20
 Overall, the data demonstrate that the Janssen vaccine has a good
efficacy and side-effect profile..

Sputnik V or Gam-COVID-Vac, developed by the Gamaleya
Institute, is a recombinant human adenovirus-based vaccine that uses two
different vectors (rAd26 and rAd5) to carry the gene encoding for the spike
protein of SARS-CoV-2. Only one vector (rAd26) is given at dose 1 and the other
(rAd5) at dose 2. This strategy prevents immunity against the vector. It can be
stored as either a liquid at −18°C, or it can be freeze-dried and stored at 2°C
to 8°C.
21
 Regarding the safety and efficacy of the vaccine, both were evaluated in
a randomized, double-blind phase-3 trial performed in Moscow, Russia. In the
trial, a total of 21,977 participants aged 18 years or older were randomized in
a 3:1 ratio to the vaccine or placebo groups. Two doses of the vaccine or
placebo were given 21 days apart to the respective groups.
21
 The mean age of the participants was 45.3 years, and the majority of
participants were Caucasian (98.5%).
21
 From 21 days after the first dose of the vaccine, efficacy against
symptomatic COVID-19 illness was 91.6% (95% CI, 85.6–95.2%) with 16 confirmed
cases of COVID-19 in the vaccine group and 62 confirmed in the placebo group.
21
 There were also 20 cases of moderate to severe COVID-19 infection
confirmed in the placebo group at least 21 days after the first dose and 0 in
the vaccine group, indicating a VE of 100% against moderate to severe infection.
21
 The most common adverse effects in both groups were flu-like illness,
injection site reactions, headaches, and asthenia, with the majority being grade
1 (94.0%).
21
 Serious adverse events were also reported in both the vaccine group and
placebo group, but they were deemed not to be associated with the vaccination.
Further investigations are still needed to determine the duration of protection
of the vaccine and to determine the safety and efficacy of the vaccine in
populations not included in the study (e.g. children, adolescents, and pregnant
and lactating women)..

CoronaVac is an inactivated vaccine developed by SinoVac
Biotech containing inactivated SARS-CoV-2.
22
 The vaccine can be stored at 2°C to 8°C for up to 3 years making it an
attractive option for development. Two phase-1/2 clinical trials assessed the
safety, tolerability, and immunogenicity of the CoronaVac vaccine.22,23 The first
study (18–59 years old included only) placed 744 participants in either a
vaccine or placebo group where they were further divided based on vaccination
schedule and dosage (3 and 6 μg). In the second study (⩾60 years old included
only), 422 participants were randomized to receive two doses of CoronaVac or
placebo 28 days apart and then further divided based on dosage amount only (3
and 6 μg for phase 1; 1.5, 3, and 6 μg for phase 2). Safety results from both
trials show a favorable side-effect profile with most symptoms being transient
and of mild severity. The most common adverse effect was injection site pain;
others included fatigue and fever. In the 18–59 years old study, one serious
adverse event of acute hypersensitivity was possibly related to vaccination.
22
 No serious adverse events were associated with the vaccine or placebo in
the ⩾60-year-old study. Between the dosage amounts in both studies, the
tolerability was consistent and the immunogenicity was also similar for the 3
and 6 μg doses (less in 1.5 μg).
23
 Multiple phase-3 trials have also taken place to determine the
effectiveness of CoronaVac in countries, such as Brazil, Indonesia, and Turkey.
In the Brazil trial, 252 cases of COVID-19 were recorded from roughly 9200
health care workers, with 167 in the placebo group and 85 in the vaccine group.
24
 The reported efficacy of the vaccine in preventing mild and severe
COVID-19 infection was 50.4%. In comparison, the Turkey trial reported that the
vaccine was 83.5% effective at preventing symptomatic infection based on 29
COVID-19 cases among 1,322 volunteers while results from the Indonesia trial
found that the vaccine was 65.3% effective at preventing symptomatic infection
based on 25 COVID-19 cases among 1,600 people.
24
 Some reasons for the lower efficacy of CoronaVac in the Brazil trial may
include increased likelihood of exposure to the virus since participants were
healthcare workers, and insufficient time for participants to reach peak
immunity since the doses were administered only 2 weeks apart.
24
 The phase-3 SinoVac study in Chile showed the VE 14 days post second dose
to prevent symptomatic COVID-19 (67%, 95% CI: 65–69%), hospital admission (85%,
95% CI: 83–87%), intensive care unit (ICU) admission (89%, 95%CI: 84–92%) and
death (80%, 95%CI: 73–86%).
25
 The Phase-3 SinoVac trial in Brazil showed an overall VE against
symptomatic COVID-19 (50.7%, 95% CI: 35.9–62%), moderate cases requiring
hospitalization (83.7%, 95% CI: 58–93.7%), and severe cases requiring
hospitalization (100%, 95%CI: 56.4–100%).
26
 As with any vaccine, a contraindication for CoronaVac is anaphylaxis to
it or to one of its constituents..

Due to the disease burden of SARS-CoV-2, the development and
manufacturing of COVID-19 vaccines has been occurring at a remarkable pace which has
not been seen before. There are many emerging vaccines with different mechanisms of
actions that will be briefly explored. Bharat Biotech, an Indian company, has
designed the inactivated COVID-19 vaccine Covaxin (BBV152). Once inside the body,
the inactivated viruses can initiate an immune response through the interaction of
surface proteins with APCs. Phase-1/2 trials showed no serious side effects and
phase-3 trials are currently underway.
27
 The state-owned Chinese company Sinopharm has also made an inactivated
COVID-19 vaccine called BBIBP-CorV. The Sinopharm phase-3 trial showed that the VE
in symptomatic cases for the WIV04 strain-based vaccine (72.8, 95% CI: 58.1–82.4%)
and HB02 strain-based vaccine (78.1 95% CI: 64.8–86.3%).28,29 It is approved in Bahrain,
U.A.E, and China. NVX-CoV2373 is another promising vaccine produced by Novavax. It
is a protein subunit vaccine made by assembling SARS-CoV-2 spike proteins into
nanoparticles. A phase-3 trial in the United Kingdom displayed an efficacy rate of
89.3%; however, a phase-2 trial in South Africa had an efficacy just under 50%.
28
 This discrepancy is thought to arise because of a new variant in South
Africa. Other emerging vaccines include CoVLP produced by Medicago which uses the
plant N. benthamiana to create virus-like particles that mimic
SARS-CoV-2, CVnCoV produced by CureVac which is an mRNA vaccine, Convidecia produced
by CanSino Biologics which is adenovirus based (Ad5), Ad26.COV2.S produced by
Johnson & Johnson which is also adenovirus based (Ad26), and ZF2001 created by
Anhui Zhifei Longcom which is a protein subunit vaccine. Even though highly
effective, COVID-19 vaccines are already in use, it is still important to have a
range of vaccines such as those listed above to bring the pandemic under control.
Having a diverse profile ensures that vaccines will work for individuals from all
ethnic backgrounds and with various underlying health conditions.
30
 Getting the virus under control will also require doses for a large
proportion of the world. To meet this requirement as soon as possible, having
multiple vaccines will help in maximizing the volume of doses that can be produced.
In addition, there are many technical issues such as cold storage and
transportation, cost, and dosing of certain vaccines that arise when trying to
vaccinate remote populations. For example, both the Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna
vaccines are expensive and transported at temperatures of −70°C and −20°C making it
difficult to access many locations all at once. Since most vaccines require two
doses spaced a few weeks apart, it can be challenging for individuals without
regular access to healthcare as well.
30
 Such considerations highlight the importance of having a range of single-dose
vaccines and vaccines without the need for cold storage. A summary of efficacy,
prominent side effects and storage recommendations for all the notable COVID-19
vaccines are shown in Table
1..

Summary of vaccine efficacy, dosing strategy, and side-effects of different
COVID-19 vaccines..

CI, confidence interval; COVID-19, coronavirus disease 2019; IM,
intramuscular..

With the endurance of the COVID-19 vaccine still being
heavily researched, a chief concern is the sustainability of the
vaccine-mediated immune response. This is important in the consideration of
whether vaccinated individuals could still contract, transmit, or be carriers of
SARS-CoV-2 virus. Vaccinated individuals currently may not understand the
rationale behind why social restriction rules still apply to them. Most COVID-19
mRNA vaccines require at least 3 weeks to mount an immunological response and
create the required antibodies and proliferate accessory cells of the adaptive
immune system of the appropriate recognition repertoire.
50
 This may be particularly relevant in the context of travel, as the World
Health Organization (WHO) states that a proof of vaccination should not exempt
international travelers from complying with social restrictions and
risk-reduction measures.
51
.

All vaccines are contraindicated in cases of documented
hypersensitivity to the active substance or any of the excipients. There are a
set of general guidelines relative to patients which must be adhered to until
further information is provided; predominantly regarding groups such as pregnant
or lactating women and immunodeficient patients. The Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC) considers absolute contraindications to patients who have
had severe anaphylactic reactions to a previous dose of an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine
or PEG, a component of the vaccine. Moreover, immediate allergic reactions of
any severity to polysorbate are also a significant contraindication.
Importantly, there are many precautions which are not classified as
contraindications but must be considered, such as patients who have had allergic
reactions to any vaccine or injectable therapy. In the cases of patients with a
precaution to the vaccine, they should be counseled on the benefits and risks,
but are not contraindicated from vaccination.
15
 In the instance of patients with autoimmune diseases, there is currently
insubstantial data regarding the efficacy of the vaccine; however, current
guidelines suggest that individuals with autoimmune conditions may take the
vaccine if they do not have any absolute contraindications. In the case of
patients with HIV, limited data from COVID-19 mRNA vaccination trials suggest
that they can receive the vaccine barring any contraindications..

Prior to discussing the relationship between the current
vaccines for COVID-19 and pregnancy, it is crucial to gain an insight of the
relationship between pregnancy and COVID-19 itself. Adhikari et
al. showed that there was no difference in the frequency of
Caesarean section, pre-eclampsia, preterm births, and abnormal fetal
cardiotocography in pregnant women with and without SARS-CoV-2 infection. In
addition, examination of the placenta revealed were no abnormalities, which were
initially suspected due to the cross-matching between the SARS-CoV-2 spike
protein and the placental synctyin-1 protein.
52
 Similarly, there was no association found between COVID-19 and
first-trimester spontaneous abortions.
53
 A systematic review and meta-analysis revealed that COVID-19 leads to
higher preterm deliveries (odds ratio (OR): 3.01, 95% CI: 1.16–7.85) and an
increase in the ICU admission rates (OR: 71.63, 95% CI: 9.81–523.06) in pregnant women.
54
.

Pregnancy remained an exclusion criterion for all the COVID-19 vaccine trial;
therefore, the efficacy of the COVID-19 vaccines in pregnant women is
unavailable. However, given the effectiveness of the influenza vaccines
elucidated in a meta-analysis conducted by Quach et al., it can
be hypothesized that the effects of pregnancy on the vaccine would be minimal,
but more data would be needed for confirmation.
55
 Pfizer’s animal studies revealed antibodies in the maternal rats, fetus,
and offspring, in addition to no effects on fertility pregnancy or fetal development.
56
 A similar study was conducted with the Moderna vaccine which led the US
FDA to conclude that the vaccine did not have any adverse effects on female
reproduction, fetal development, or postnatal development.
34
 Furthermore, the Oxford-AstraZeneca vaccine animal studies are still
pending. However, as a precaution, the National Immunization Advisory Committee
(NIAC) has recommended for the two-dose schedule to not commence before 14 weeks
of gestation and to be completed by week 33 of gestation. This precaution
reduces any potential associations with miscarriage or pre-term birth.
57
.

Despite the exclusion of pregnancy in the preliminary stages of the trials, 23
Pfizer, 13 Moderna, and 21 AstraZeneca subjects became pregnant after enrolment
into the trial. Among this cohort, there was one miscarriage part of the Pfizer
control group, no miscarriages part of the Pfizer vaccine group, one miscarriage
part of the Moderna control group, no miscarriages part of the Moderna vaccine
group, three miscarriages part of the AstraZeneca control group, and two
miscarriages part of the AstraZeneca vaccine group. While these preliminary
numbers support the current guidelines regarding the vaccines being safe in
pregnancy, it is crucial to be aware of the ongoing studies as new data
emerges..

The CDC v-safe COVID-19 Pregnancy Study explored the effect of mRNA vaccine
(Pfizer-BioNTech or Moderna) on the pregnancy. The pregnancy loss within those
with a completed pregnancy included a spontaneous abortion (<20 weeks) rate
of 12.6% (104 out of 827) and stillbirth (⩾20 weeks) incidence of 0.1% (1 out of 725).
58
 The neonatal outcomes within the live birth infant cohort showed preterm
birth (<37 weeks) incidence at 9.4% (60 out of 636), small for gestational
age incidence of 3.2% (23 out of 724), and congenital anomalies were seen in
2.2% (16 out of 724).
58
 No neonatal deaths were observed in this study..

Limited vaccine resources have caused some governments to
extend the date of the second dose beyond the recommended manufacturer date. On
December 30, NHS England had made the decision to prioritize the administration
of the first doses, and to extend the second doses of the vaccine to the end of
12 weeks, rather than the recommended 3–4 weeks as shown in the clinical phase-3
trial. Pfizer-BioNTech at the time had no data to support this decision, and
thus stated that the safety and efficacy of the vaccine had not been evaluated
on different dosing schedules, and importantly, the second dose should not be
administered later than 42 days.
59
.

Newly accrued evidence might warrant changes in the landscape of this vaccination
program. Estimation of the effectiveness of the Pfizer-BioNTech after a single
dose from the primary data from Israeli population (n = 500,000) showed that
from day 0 to day 8 post–vaccination, the likelihood of contracting COVID-19
infection doubled.
60
 This result may appear counterintuitive, but it takes 3 weeks for the
vaccine to instill efficacy during which this real-world population could have
not maintained the stringent public health measures which lead to the increased
incidence in COVID-19 in this time-period. Then from day 8 to day 21 the
incidence of COVID-19 declined and at day 21 the vaccine effectiveness was
documented at 91%.
60
 This efficacy was seen to stabilize at 90% for the duration of the study
(9 weeks), and the authors of this study extrapolate this stability up to 6 months.
60
 This concludes that the single dose of Pfizer-BioNTech is highly
protective from day 21 onwards and supports the NHS England’s vaccination policy
for extending gaps between the doses. The data from the Early Pandemic
Evaluation and Enhanced Surveillance of COVID-19 (EAVE II) trial in the Scottish
population revealed that a single dose of Pfizer (n = 650,000) and
Oxford-AstraZeneca (n = 490,000) vaccines resulted in a decline in
hospitalization at 4 weeks by 84% and 94%, respectively.
61
.

However, the trials for the Oxford-AstraZeneca vaccine included varied spacing
schedules between doses. The findings from these trials displayed that a greater
space between the first and second dose provided a superior immune response.
This is supported by a combined trial between a UK and Brazil study, which
demonstrated a higher VE 14 days after a second dose in patients who had greater
than 6 weeks between their first and second dose than patients who had less than
6 weeks by 53.4%.17,62.

It was also proposed that to meet the supply shortage that vaccine dose can be
halved. Half-dose of Moderna vaccine (50ug) was in a phase-IIa trial. Immune
response in the half-dose group compared to those that received a full dose were
the same. Therefore, this dosing strategy is supported from an immunogenicity
perspective. It is reasonable to infer that the immunogenicity would translate
to immune protection, but unfortunately no clinical trial has validated the
immune protection for this dosing strategy..

Mutations are changes in the SARS-CoV-2 viral genome that occur
naturally over time. These mutations from the parent SARS-CoV-2 virus create
variants. A certain amount of genetic variation is expected as SARS-CoV-2 replicates
as such it is important to monitor circulating viral variants to collate key
mutations. Fortunately, coronaviruses have a slower rate of mutation of 1 to 2
nucleotides per month.
63
 These definitions become complicated when environmental factors apply
selective pressures on these variants that enable them to express distinct
phenotypes that may facilitate viral fitness. This ability of a variant to express
distinct phenotypes is termed as a strain. A compilation of beneficial lineage
defining mutations can create a strain that has a higher transmission rate or induce
severe disease. This raises the question: will the current vaccines or convalescent
immunity from a non-variant SARS-CoV-2 infection provide adequate immunological
protection against these new variants?.

Coronaviruses mutate spontaneously via antigenic drift. This process
typically utilizes the virus-specific transcription regulatory network (TRN)
sequence to initiate the change, resulting in a new mRNA sequence virus being
formed. Homologous and genetic recombination allows for the virus to gain more
ecological features and has been speculated to be the reason why SARS-CoV-2 was
zoonotic in origin.
64
 A variant of the original SARS-CoV-2 virus with a D614G substitution in the
spike protein encoding gene emerged in early February 2020, and by June 2020, D614G
became the dominant form of the virus circulating globally.
65
 Studies have shown that the D614G mutation resulted in increased infectivity
and transmissibility.
66
 Since then, there have been many viral lineages to note, most notable VOC
include the B.1.1.7/20I/501.Y.V1 variant that was first detected in the United
Kingdom in October 2020, the B.1.351/20 H/501Y.V2 variant that was detected in South
Africa in December 2020, and the Lineage P.1. (B.1.1.28.1) variant that was detected
in Tokyo in January 2021 but is believed to have originated from Brazil..

Currently, there exists two open-source real-time software tools to analyze and
assign nomenclature of genetic variations in the SARS-CoV-2 virus: Nextstrain and
PANGOLIN.64,67 Both refer to the GISAID (Global Initiative on Sharing All
Influenza Data) genomic database but have slight differences with regards to their
nomenclature to describe various lineages of the virus. The COVID-19 Genomics UK
Consortium has also developed CoV-GLUE, an open-source browser application that
allows for easy referral of all sequenced SARS-CoV-2 genetic replacements,
insertions, and deletions.
68
 Therefore, sequencing every local infection will yield a repository to track
the development of new mutations and variants..

Before diving deeper into these variants, it is important to
understand the physical alteration in the S-protein at a molecular level and the
perceived functional advantages that the SARS-CoV-2 gains. Table 2 highlights some of the notable
S-protein mutations as they evolve amid the pandemic..

Summary of the physical and functional alterations of S-protein due to
notable amino acid substitutions..

RBD, receptor-binding domain; VOC, variants of concern..

Newly emerged variants of SARS-CoV-2 have now become VOC which
can be attributed to their new ability of increased transmission and infectivity.
Therefore, it is important to collate the data on the mutations they acquired, the
extend of spread, and the efficacy of different vaccines to create a repository for
further analysis (Table
3)..

Summary of data on features, acquired cluster of S-protein mutations, and
vaccine efficacy studies for the major COVID-19 variants of concern..

CI, confidence interval; COVID-19, coronavirus disease 2019; VOC,
variants of concern..

There are more variants emerging as the pandemic progresses, but it is important to
note that there is still a myriad of available vaccines in our armamentarium that
are adequately efficacious in the performed neutralization assays as well as the
real-world data. Furthermore, while vaccines induce the antibody-dependent immunity,
they can also stimulate other components of the adaptative immune system such as the
Memory B-cells, CD8+ Tc cells, and CD4+ Th cells to mount their own response against
the viral variants. This can compensate for the reduction in neutralization rate by
the vaccine induced antibodies. Interestingly, the adaptative immune system can
proliferate libraries of memory B-cells with mutated antibody repertoires that can
predict viral variants. Therefore, it is prudent to commence vaccinations in
accordance with the local public health bodies. This combined with the continued
implementation of public health measures until target level of herd immunity is
acquired can lead toward mitigating the prevalence and incidence of COVID-19
variants..

This review highlighted the current available vaccines and
candidates being rolled out amid the ongoing prevention measures and summarized the
documented findings with regards to their efficacies, side-effects, and storage
requirements. An overview of the physiology of immunogenic responses against the
disease provided by the more prominent vaccines were discussed, alongside questions
regarding the implementation of vaccines; heterologous prime-boosting, vaccine
contraindications, dosing strategies, side effects, and the presence of SARS-CoV-2
mutations and variants..

There are still many unanswered questions that need to be addressed with regards to
antibodies produced in individuals including their impact on the clinical course and
severity of the disease, how long will they remain in the body to protect from the
disease, and if what we have is enough to deal with newly emerging variants. Studies
on these topics are rapidly being conducted and published on a global scale, and
scientific communities are working on the clock to produce as much information to
bring us a better understanding on how to deal with this disease..

For this global pandemic to end, it is imperative that people are vaccinated as
quickly as possible until herd immunity can be achieved. One aspect of achieving
this, in the face of vaccine hesitancy, is to address the lack of community
understanding on how vaccines work, the risks, and the factors that keep this area
of research volatile and distribution policies ever-changing. In addition, it is
important to remain cautious about the information being released and to trust the
accredited sources and experts, rather than the aberrant rumors being spread through
social media. Nonetheless, the COVID-19 vaccines have shown to be highly promising
and we recommend for everyone that is eligible to take the vaccine at the correct
dosing interval when they are given the chance as this would potentiate a positive
trend toward pandemic resolution..

Authors’ contributions: CY, AA, Amogh P, Akul P, AP performed acquisition and curation of the data; CY,
AA, Amogh P, Akul P, AP, YYL and PK analyzed the data, performed interpretation
of the data, and wrote of the original draft; YYL and PK performed the critical
revision; All authors have read and approved the final manuscript..

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article..

Funding: The authors received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article..

ORCID iD: Pramath Kakodkar 
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5288-1247.

