.

The development of
recombinant COVID-19 vaccines has resulted from
scientific progress made at an unprecedented speed during 2020. The
recombinant spike glycoprotein monomer, its trimer, and its recombinant
receptor-binding domain (RBD) induce a potent anti-RBD neutralizing
antibody response in animals. In COVID-19 convalescent sera, there
is a good correlation between the antibody response and potent neutralization.
In this review, we summarize with a critical view the molecular aspects
associated with the interaction of SARS-CoV-2 RBD with its receptor
in human cells, the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), the epitopes
involved in the neutralizing activity, and the impact of virus mutations
thereof. Recent trends in RBD-based vaccines are analyzed, providing
detailed insights into the role of antigen display and multivalence
in the immune response of vaccines under development..

SARS-CoV-2 receptor-binding domain (RBD)-specific antibodies
are crucial for neutralizing efficacy. Emerging mutations, the quality
of the IgG response, and the benefit of multivalent display are analyzed
here for RBD subunit vaccines..

Viral infections are initiated
with the binding of viral particles
to the host’s surface cellular receptors, a process that defines
the virus’s cellular and tissue tropism. In SARS-CoV-2, this
process is mediated by the viral spike (S) glycoprotein trimer on
the virion surface through its receptor-binding domain (RBD)..

The S-glycoprotein is a 1273-amino acid polypeptide with 22 N-glycans,
a class I fusion protein,1 which forms
trimers on the virus surface. Each trimer has three main topological
domains: head, stalk, and cytoplasmic tail. The head contains the
S1 subunit with two domains: the N-terminal domain (NTD) and the receptor-binding
domain (RBD), where the receptor-binding motif (RBM) is responsible
for direct interaction with its receptor in human cells, the angiotensin-converting
enzyme 2 (ACE2).2.

SARS-CoV-2 uses
the same host-cell entry receptor as SARS-CoV,
ACE2,3 which is expressed, among others,
in specific subsets of human respiratory epithelial cells in nasal
passages, airways, and alveoli.4 S-Glycoprotein
trimers have most of the time all RBDs in a hidden conformation, the
“down” conformation, which seeks to evade immune recognition
but, at the same time, cannot interact with ACE2. A structural transition
occurs from the “down” to the “up” RBD
conformation, achieving high-affinity binding to ACE2. Following RBD–ACE2
binding, the S-glycoprotein is cleaved by host proteases, allowing
membrane fusion and entry of the virus.5.

Knowledge on the SARS-CoV-2–ACE2 interaction and its
neutralization
by antibodies has been achieved at an unprecedented speed. Recombinant
protein subunit vaccines in clinical development include recombinant
SARS-CoV-2 proteins as active components: (i) S-glycoprotein monomer,6 (ii) S-glycoprotein trimer,7,8 and
(iii) RBD-based immunogens with several forms of antigen display (monomeric,
dimeric, or multivalent, vide infra). All induce
anti-RBD neutralizing antibodies in laboratory animals, and some are
in evaluation in humans. In this paper, we show key molecular aspects
regarding virus–host cell interaction, mechanisms of virus
neutralization by antibodies blocking such interaction, and the impact
of virus mutation on transmissibility and escape from neutralizing
antibodies. Attention is paid to how these aspects relate to vaccine
development, as well as to the different types of RBD displays in
vaccine candidates..

SARS-CoV-2 RBD comprises 193 amino acid residues (from Thr333 to
Pro527), including the core and the RBM covering residues 438–506
(Figure 1, in pink).
The core is structured around a twisted, five-strand antiparallel
β-sheet with short connecting helices and loops and is stabilized
by three disulfide bridges: Cys336–Cys361, Cys379–Cys432,
and Cys391–Cys525. A fourth disulfide bridge, Cys480–Cys488,
connects the loops at the distal ends of the RBM.9.

RBD–ACE2 interaction. (A) Transparent surface and ribbon
representation of the SARS-CoV-2 RBD (residues Arg319–Phe541)
complexed to the ACE2 N-terminal peptidase domain (residues Ser19–Asp615).
The interface ACE2–RBD is colored in green and red, respectively,
and the RBM in pink. The arrows indicate four different disulfide
bridges able to stabilize the RBD. (B) Amino acids of ACE2 directly
interacting with RBD (green). (C) Amino acids of RBD directly interacting
with ACE2 (red)..

In terms of glycosylation,
the two domains (NTD and RBD) in the
S-glycoprotein head are very different. NTD is highly glycosylated
(7 N-linked carbohydrates on Asn 61, 74, 122, 149, 165, 234, 282),
while RBD has one N-linked carbohydrate chain on Asn343 located in
the core with no glycosylation at RBM. The N-linked carbohydrate chain
on Asn331 is located between the two domains.10 The glycosylation pattern shows a higher prevalence of complex N-glycans
compared with the most common oligomannoside-type glycans11 exposed on viruses infecting humans12 (e.g., HIV-1 and Ebola). In the spike trimer,
the highest carbohydrate density in the NTD surrounds the head’s
surface, helping camouflage the RBD, especially in the “down”
conformation (vide infra)..

ACE2 is the cellular
receptor for three coronaviruses: NL-63, SARS-CoV,
and SARS-CoV-2.13 This receptor is a zinc-dependent
carboxypeptidase that cleaves one residue from the C-terminus of angiotensin
peptides. It participates in blood pressure regulation14 and is also associated with protection from
severe acute respiratory failure. During SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 infection,
lung injury is associated with down regulation of ACE2.15 Binding to the hACE2 receptor is a critical
initial step in SARS-CoV16 and SARS-CoV-2
infection.17−20 SARS-CoV-2 RBD binds in vitro to hACE2 with an
affinity in the low nanomolar range.21 This
high ACE2-binding affinity is due to the large interacting surfaces:
864 Å on RBD,2 involving 21 amino
acids (Figure 1C, in
red) and 823 Å on the hACE2 receptor,2 involving 22 amino acids (Figure 1B, in green). A network of hydrophilic and hydrophobic
interactions is established at the RBD–ACE2 interface with
13 hydrogen bonds and two salt bridges (K417-D30 and E484-K31).17−20 For SARS-CoV-2, the crystal structures of RBD complexed with hACE2
have been determined (recombinant in Hi5 insect cells, PDB codes 6M0J,96VW1,16 and 6LZG(2))..

Epidemiologic
and biochemical studies have shown that the infectivity
of different SARS-CoV-2 strains is proportional to the binding free
energy (BFE) between the strain-specific RBD and ACE2 in the host
cell.22 RBM mutations resulting in an affinity
increase also lead to enhanced virus transmissibility,23 favoring the spread of the mutated virus. The
probability that novel variants emerge during human to human transmission
is favored by the increasing number of infected individuals, attaining
>100 million confirmed cases as of 28 January 2021. The low number
of novel mutations reaching high frequency in sequenced SARS-CoV-2
genomes24 is compensated by the number
of individuals infected. In the COVID-19 prevaccine era, the increased
affinity for the receptor was probably the main driving force for
mutation, which is associated with a faster spread and in some cases
leads to fast and complete replacement of the original strain..

The following single mutations of SARS-CoV-2 illustrate their impact
on affinity and viral spreading: N501Y, S477N, E484K, L452R, and K417N/T
(Figure 2A). Mutation
N501Y at the RBM is probably the best known and the leading mutation
in the new lineage B.1.1.7, isolated in the U.K. in September 202025 and rapidly spreading to more than 75 countries
by mid-February 2021. New intermolecular contacts (between Tyr501
of RBD and ACE2,26Figure 2B) through hydrophobic (ACE2, Tyr41 aromatic
ring, and Lys353 aliphatic chain) and polar (ACE2, ε-amino group
of Lys353) interactions contribute to increased affinity compared
to the wild type virus.27,28 The higher affinity
increases the rate of transmission in about 60%.29 The fast spreading and, consequently, the high level of
circulation may promote epistatic mutation such as Q498R, which would
additionally increase the affinity through a more favorable interaction
with L45 and Q42 at hACE2 (Figure 2C). If this event takes places, we should expect an
increment in the infectivity.24 The binding
affinity to hACE2 of RBD mutations selected by nature, S477N, E484K,
and N501Y, strongly correlate to their frequency: in a decreasing
order: E484K/N501Y double mutant (KDapp 126 pM), N501Y (KDapp 455
pM), and S477N (KDapp 710 pM) (value for WT: 1600 pM).24.

Selected mutations in RBD. (A) Location of each mutated
amino acid
with respect to the RBM surface (pink). Residues belonging to the
ACE2 epitope are highlighted in red, and those without contact with
ACE2 are colored in blue. (B) and (D) New interactions associated
with N501Y and E484K mutations, respectively. (C) Potential epistatic
mutation Q498R associated with N501Y..

Mutation E484K usually appears together with N501Y, slightly increasing
the affinity for ACE2.30 Two lineages have
this double mutation in common: lineage B.1.351, that emerged after
the first epidemic wave in the most affected metropolitan area within
the Eastern Cape Province31 in South Africa
(and spread to more than 30 countries), and lineage B.1.1.28, initially
described in Rio de Janeiro, and currently widely spread in Brazil32 and other countries. Recently, mutations N501Y
and E484K appeared together in the U.K. following the spread of lineage
B.1.1.7. E484K suppresses the salt bridge RBD E484–hACE2 K31,
abolishing this important RBD–hACE2 charge attraction, and
predicting a reduction in the affinity, especially at the new K484–K31
interaction.33 Molecular dynamics simulation
identified the potential formation of a new salt bridge RBD K484–hACE2
E75 as a consequence of the flexibility in the RBD 475–487
loop region.34 This allows a transient
ion pairing to be established between RBD K484–hACE2 E75 and
a new salt bridge (Figure 2D)..

SARS-CoV-2 S-glycoprotein trimers are exposed on the virus surface.
Each of the three RBDs may adopt two conformations, called “down”
and “up”. A fully exposed, accessible RBD is possible
only in the “up” conformation, where its RBM can interact
with cellular hACE2 receptors (Figure 1).35 The cryoelectron microscopy
(CEM) of SARS-CoV-2 S-glycoprotein reveals a predominance of the “down”
conformation,36 which is ineffective for
binding the receptor..

The S1 glycoprotein domain, containing
the RBD and NTD, is the
protein’s most flexible part. Interactions between neighboring
monomers show significant energetic differences for “up–down”
and “down–down” conformations.37 Molecular dynamics simulations38 have shown that the RBD switches from the “down” to
the “up” position through a semiopen intermediate that
reduces the free energy barrier between the closed (“down”)
and open (“up”) states. This intermediate may already
bind to hACE2. In addition, interchain interactions are stronger and
more numerous in “up–down” than in “down–down”
conformations..

Studies using CEM confirmed that S-glycoprotein
trimers protrude
from the virion surface. An individual virion contains 25 ± 9
trimers in a highly dynamic structure where the opening of the RBD
is stochastic. On average, approximately 41% of trimers have no RBD
“up” (i.e., all their RBDs are “down”),
while one RBD is “up” in 45% of trimers and two RBDs
are “up” in only 13% of trimers.39 Structural analysis revealed that the D614G mutation that
emerged in Europe in February 2020 increased the RBD “up”
proportion from 41% to 82%.40 This new
mutation seriously impacted transmissibility, and, as a consequence
of higher viral load and shedding, it became dominant in the pandemic
by April 2020..

When a single RBD adopts the “up”
conformation, its
RBM becomes accessible for binding to hACE2 but also becomes more
accessible to neutralizing antibodies. On the contrary, in the “down”
conformation, the RBM is camouflaged due to the shielding effect of
glycans covering ∼35% of its surface,41 thus preventing binding to hACE2 but also reducing effective recognition
by the immune system. The mutation D614G that increases transmissibility
also exposes better the RBD and makes the virus more susceptible to
neutralization by anti-RBD monoclonal antibodies.42 The RBD core is camouflaged in both the “up”
and “down” conformations42 by the shielding effect of N-glycans (at Asn343, Asn331, Asn234,
and Asn165)..

Many SARS-CoV-2-binding antibodies have been identified
in convalescent
COVID-19 patients’ sera, but only a few led to virus neutralization
and protection from the disease.43 Recent
studies have shown that RBD-binding antibodies are responsible for
90% of the neutralizing activity in convalescent human sera.44 To date, almost 500 (476 and increasing) neutralizing
antibodies (NAbs) targeting the SARS-CoV-2 RBD have been screened
from B-cells of COVID-19 patients. They are regularly updated in the
coronavirus antibody database (Cov-AbDab).45.

Human monoclonal NAbs have led to a better understanding of
RBD
epitopes and the angle of approach necessary for binding and neutralization.
NAbs can be clustered in several groups based on their interaction
with distinct RBD-binding sites. Here we consider only the most potent
neutralizing antibodies, which are associated with RBM binding and
clustered in two main groups. The target for type 1 antibodies (different
classifications can be found elsewhere) is the fully exposed surface
in the RBD “up” conformation of the trimer (open state, Figure 3C).44,46 They block directly the RBM interaction with hACE2 (Figure 3B). An important number of
the most efficient NAbs have their heavy chains encoded by IGVH3-53
or IGVH3-66 with a short CDRH3 length (9–12 amino acids) and
light chains often encoded by IGLV1-9/3-20. These antibodies interact
with an epitope overlapping the hACE2 interacting surface (Figure 3A,B). The paired
heavy-light chain signatures contribute to potent SARS-CoV-2 neutralization
in convalescent antibody responses.47.

RBD epitopes
of NAbs and location of the important mutations. (A)
Example of antibodies of type 1. NAbs B38 and S2H14 interact with
their respective epitopes overlapping the ACE2-binding region. (B)
RBD surface (red) delimited by residues interacting with ACE2. (C)
Example of antibodies of type 2. NAbs BD23, Fab2-4, S2H13, and P2B-2F6
interact with epitopes exposed in the RBD-down and RBD-up conformations..

Type 2 NAbs interact with the RBD-binding surface
accessible in
both “up” and “down” conformations (open/closed
S states), thus blocking ACE2–RBD binding without functionally
mimicking ACE2.48 Their various pairs IGHV–IGLV
are responsible for the diversity of recognized RBD epitopes and angles
of approach to RBD (Figure 3C)..

The human neutralizing polyclonal
response is a combination of type 1 and type 2 antibodies, with different
angles of approach to RBD epitopes, mostly involving residues of the
RBM. This diversity is important for avoiding mutants’ escape
from neutralization. In the naïve population, SARS-CoV-2
is evolving for increasing its infectivity and affinity for ACE2,
as previously described. However, in the immune population, this evolution
is driven by the adaptation to the host immune system through a selection
of escaping mutants. The best example of such mutation is E484K, found in vitro as a response to virus incubation with convalescent
plasma.49 The E484 position bear a negative
charge (glutamate) in the WT RBD (Figure 4), but after the E484K mutation, the position
changes to a positive charge at Lys. This perturbation has an important
impact on the epitopes, mainly for type 2 antibodies (Figure 3C). This mutation reduces significantly
both the naturally acquired and vaccine-induced immunity in lineages
B.1.351, B.1.1.28, and in a double mutant derived from B.1.1.7. Lineage
B.1.351 raised concern by its potential to escape from therapeutically
relevant monoclonal antibodies50−52 and by reducing 6–10 times
the neutralization titer in convalescent and vaccinated sera.51 However, this reduction is vaccine-dependent;
for example, in the serum of a subject vaccinated with a dimeric RBD,
the average neutralization titer is reduced only from 106 to 67.53.

(A) Electrostatic potential (red −10, +10 blue)
and (B)
hydrophobicity (green −20, +20 gold) maps represented on surfaces
of the WT RBD and selected mutated RBD. Small circles show the biggest
changes induced by mutation..

Another mutation impacting the electrostatic potential is K417N/T,
which suppresses the positive charge at Lys. (Figure 4). Its impact is not as marked as E484K but
is relevant enough to abolish neutralization by some antibodies binding
to this region.54 Other individual mutations
are less effective. For example, N501Y only induces a small increase
in hydrophobicity (yellow) and a small decrease in the potential (red
surface). As a result, the reduction of neutralization observed for
the N501Y strain in convalescent sera is rather small.55 In the WT strain, position L452 neither binds
to hACE2 nor interacts with antibodies. Yet, the recently reported
mutation L452R, appearing in California,56 modifies the surface hydrophobicity (Figure 4). However, so far it is not clear whether
this mutation can affect the affinity for hACE2 or the antibodies’
neutralization capacity..

Once the immunodominance of SARS-CoV-2
RBD was proven,44 with this domain being
the target of most NAbs,47,57,58 the question was whether this
individual protein per se would become an effective
vaccine immunogen.59,60 The high quality and functionality
of anti-RBD antibodies, along with the good correlation between their
presence and the neutralization capacity of COVID-19 convalescent
sera,61,62 support the RBD potential as vaccine antigen.
Nevertheless, a great effort has been devoted to determining whether
this protein alone or a multivalent RBD construct is a better class
of immunogen. Here we analyze some evidence based on reports from
vaccine developers..

The use
of monomeric RBD
as antigen is indeed the most straightforward approach, and some groups
have developed immunogens based on RBD expressed in insect cells,63 yeast (Pichia pastoris),64 and mammalian cells (CHO and HEK293).65,66 In general, such versions of the antigen have induced a good response
of NAbs in various animal models, including mice,63,65 rabbits,63 rodents,66 and nonhuman primates (NHPs), these latter showing a notable
protection against an in vivo challenge with SARS-CoV-2.63 One of these reports revealed that the antibody
response was dose-dependent and that the immune sera—rather
than splenic T cells—was responsible for the protective immunity.63 To our knowledge, two of these monomeric RBD
vaccine candidates have advanced to phase 1 and 2 clinical evaluation.67 In addition, one mRNA vaccine, namely, ARCoV,68 expressing monomeric RBD in the host cells has
advanced to phase 1 after proving high titers of NAbs and a Th1-biased
cellular response in mice and NHPs. Nonetheless, recent studies have
shown that multivalent RBD versions have a greater and higher quality
antibody response than the monomer versions in laboratory animals.61,69−71.

As shown in Figure 5A, a rationale for the improved immune response
of multimeric RBD is its capacity to enhance B-cell activation by
cross-linking their receptors,70,71 in contrast to the
typically poorer B-cell response achieved by the monomeric antigen.
To achieve this, new trends in vaccine development are focusing on
oligomeric, conjugate, and nanoparticle RBD immunogens featuring multivalent
display of this antigen. The key to succeed with such constructions
is not antigen multimerization per se but its combination
of a suitable RBD orientation/presentation seeking to enhance the
neutralizing response. This needs to be done in such a way that the
RBM is exposed better than other epitopes of the RBD core, thus directing
most of the IgG response toward the motif that actually interacts
with the hACE2 receptor and initiates virus internalization. This
design should lead to a neutralizing/binding antibody ratio similar
or—ideally—higher than that of convalescent sera, resulting
in a protective vaccine..

(A) Comparison of the B-cell response with different
types of RBD
immunogens. The multivalent RBD display permits cross-linking B-cell
receptors leading to a more intense signaling. (B) Representation
of the constructions of multivalent-displayed RBD immunogens by chemical
conjugation, self-assembling, and ligation processes..

The design of dimeric RBD is
a clear bet for antigen multimerization. Deep analysis of the RBD
structure reveals that both the N- and C-terminal regions are far
away from the RBM and are therefore suitable sites for multimerization
or ligation. This logic has been followed for the design of dimeric
RBD vaccines70,72,73 in which two RBDs are connected by their C-terminal tails. This
design may allow not only cross-linking of B-cell receptors (Figure 5A), but at the same
time it can provide the correct exposure and orientation of the RBM,
thus guiding the antibody response toward this motif. Consequently,
it has been proven that RBD dimers elicited NAb titers 10–100-fold
higher than those produced by the monomeric antigen.70 This suggests that the immunodominant RBM epitopes are
more accessible than the RBD core, as compared with the monomer where
the entire RBD surface is fully exposed to immune recognition. For
example, the vaccine candidate named ZF200170,73 is a SARS-CoV-2 RBD dimer designed with a tandem repeat single chain
(sc-dimer) that connects the two protein domains.70 ZF2001 completed phase 1 and 2 clinical trials proving
the elicitation of very high titers of NAbs. In parallel, our group
developed a dimeric SARS-CoV-2 RBD vaccine named ‘Soberana01’,
also under clinical evaluation,72 in which
a disulfide bond connects the two RBDs at Cys538..

Other vaccine
platforms have also focused on RBD oligomers, as seen in DNA74 and mRNA75 vaccines
expressing RBD trimers to improve immunogenicity. Such nucleic acid
vaccines express RBD sequences incorporating a foldon trimerization
tag at the C-terminus, which triggers protein trimerization upon expression
in the host cells..

An effective
multivalent display of the RBD antigen can be achieved using the conjugate
vaccine technology. In this platform relying on conjugation chemistry,
multiple copies of the RBD antigen are chemically attached to an immunogenic
carrier protein seeking both to activate multiple B-cell receptors
(Figure 5B) and to
take advantage of the carrier-specific pre-existing T helper cells
to improve antibody production. In the context of COVID-19 vaccines,
the challenge is to carry out a precise RBD conjugation to the usually
large carrier without affecting the RBD neutralizing epitopes in the
chemical reaction. Our group has developed a vaccine candidate, namely,
Soberana02, in which multiple RBDs are site-selectively conjugated
to the tetanus toxoid using a Cys residue placed at the C-terminus,
which is far away from the relevant RBM region.76 In this design, the exposure of the neutralizing epitopes
is maximized, while the immunogenic carrier favors the production
of CD4+ T helper cells required for a potent antibody response. In
animal models, this vaccine candidate elicited a robust neutralizing
response.76 Phase 1 and 2 clinical trials77,78 showed good neutralizing seroconversion in humans, and the candidate
advanced to phase 3 clinical evaluation as of March 2021..

This is a technology69,79 that combines the advantages of antigen presentation in a virus-like
particle of nanometric size with those of multivalent display to enhance
B-cell activation. Indeed, the antigen display achieved with this
type of self-assembling nanoparticle (NP) can mimic that in SARS-CoV-2.
Nevertheless, a favorable RBD display needs to be attained during
NP assembly to favor the spatial presentation of RBM. As depicted
in Figure 5B, two approaches
can be followed to successfully display multiple RBDs on the surface
of immunogenic particles resembling the natural virus. The first approach
consists of the expression of RBD genetically fused to another protein
fragment or tail, enabling its self-assembling either alone or with
another protein. An example of this construction is a hybrid nanoparticle71 with an RBD fused at its N-terminus (also distant
from the RBM, not blocking the neutralizing epitopes) to protein I53-50A.
Such a fusion protein self-assembles with protein I53-50B into two-component
nanoparticles displaying about 60 RBD copies on the surface. These
multivalent nanoparticles elicited NAbs titers markedly higher than
those elicited by the RBD monomer and up to 10-fold higher than the
prefusion-stabilized S ectodomain trimer. They also exhibited a neutralizing/binding
ratio higher than that in convalescent human sera.71 Fusion of the RBD to Helicobacter pylori ferritin has also led to immunogenic, self-assembling nanoparticles
in which the RBDs form radial multivalent projections that correctly
expose their neutralizing epitopes.80.

A second approach is the use of a protein ligation technology81 to conjugate several RBDs to the surface of
preassembled nanoparticles. Examples are the construction of bacteriophage
AP205 capsid-like particles decorated with multiple RBD copies82 and the assembly of multicomponent ferritin-based
nanoparticles83 by ligating both the SARS-CoV-2
RBD and heptad repeat (HR) antigens to the ferritin nanocore. In these
cases, the RBD was genetically fused to a ligation tag either at its
N- or C-terminus, thus eluding any steric hindrance at the crucial
RBM epitopes that need to be exposed at the surface. RBD-decorated
mosaic nanoparticles displaying not only multiple SARS-CoV-2 RBDs
but also RBDs of zoonotic coronaviruses have also been obtained84 by a “plug-and-display” strategy.81 The RBD-displaying nanoparticles herein discussed
provide typically monodisperse and stable formulations, which elicited
robust neutralizing immune responses in mice, ferrets, and even NHP.
It remains to be proven whether such protective efficacy can be replicated
in humans, as done for other antiviral nanoparticle vaccines.69,79.

The RBD–ACE2 interaction
is essential for SARS-CoV-2 infectivity.
For virus neutralization, antibodies blocking this interaction are
fundamental both in naturally acquired and vaccine-induced immunity.
Understanding this process is essential for vaccine improvement and
for fighting emerging SARS-CoV-2 variants. Virus mutation driven either
by ACE2 affinity enhancement—increasing infectivity—or
by escaping from acquired or vaccine-induced immunity poses a new
challenge. Vaccine candidates based on the RBD monomer have proven
success in preclinical evaluation, and they can most likely afford
sufficient protection in humans to become approved. However, compared
with monomeric RBD immunogens, those featuring multivalent RBD display
(i.e., RBD dimers, RBD-carrier conjugates and protein nanoparticles)
show greater promise due to the enhanced B-cell response and likely
longer-lasting immunity. Evidence suggests that vaccine candidates
based on multimeric RBD constructs benefit from both antigen multivalency
and a maximized exposure of RBM epitopes to improve not only the IgG
response but also neutralizing efficacy in comparison with monovalent
antigens. The induction of an improved immunity and neutralizing response,
along with the generalization of platforms that incorporate the emerging
RBD mutants, should place RBD vaccines at a competitive position to
provide a fast response against the COVID-19 pandemic..

Structural analyses were performed from PDB: 6M0J for the complex
ACE2–RBD,9 PDB: 7BZ5 for B38,85 PDB: 7BYR for BD23,86 PDB: 6XEY for Fab2-4,87 PDB: 7BWJ for P2B-2F6,88 PDB: 7JV2 for S2H13 and PDB: 7JX3 for S2H1444 antibodies complexed with RBD or the full trimeric
spike structure using the PyMOL Molecular Graphics System.89 Virtual mutations and molecular surface by electrostatic
and molecular hydrophobicity potential were realized with UCSF ChimeraX
1.1.90 PyMOL and ChimeraX were also used
for structural renderings for figures..

∥ Y.V.-B. and D.S.-M. contributed equally to this paper..

The authors
declare the following competing financial interest(s): Y.V.-B., D.S.-M,
S.F., L.R., B.S.-R., K.L., D.G.-R., D.G.R., and V.V.B. are co-inventors
on provisional SARS-CoV-2 vaccine patents including results covered
here..

We are grateful to Fondo de Ciencia e Innovación
(FONCI, Cuba) for financial support (Project-2020-20). We thank Gail
Reed for editing English grammar..

Clinical trial phase II NCT04718467,
Clinical
trial phase II RPCEC00000306, Clinical trial phase I NCT04522089..

RPCEC00000332; RPCEC00000338;
RPCEC00000349..

RPCEC00000340..

RPCEC00000347..

