.

This review covers
emerging biosensors for SARS-CoV-2 detection
together with a review of the biochemical and clinical assays that
are in use in hospitals and clinical laboratories. We discuss the
gap in bridging the current practice of testing laboratories with
nucleic acid amplification methods, and the robustness of assays the
laboratories seek, and what emerging SARS-CoV-2 sensors have currently
addressed in the literature. Together with the established nucleic
acid and biochemical tests, we review emerging technology and antibody
tests to determine the effectiveness of vaccines on individuals..

This article is made available via the ACS COVID-19 subset for unrestricted RESEARCH re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for the duration of the World Health Organization (WHO) declaration of COVID-19 as a global pandemic..

Severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) was first reported as a novel coronavirus
in December 2019 in Wuhan city, Hubei province, China and determined
to be the causative pathogen of the pneumonia outbreak first described
in Wuhan.1−3 The disease, designated as coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19), typically presents as a respiratory syndrome on a spectrum:
from mild upper respiratory tract infection with symptoms of dry cough
and fever, through to severe pneumonia, acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS), and mortality.4,5 Transmission of the
virus is predominantly thought to be airborne via aerosol or droplet
acquisition when an infected patient talks, coughs, or sneezes within
close proximity to an uninfected person.6 As a direct result, the virus has spread rapidly throughout the
global population, causing the COVID-19 pandemic; as of February 2021,
SARS-COV-2 has caused 114 million cases worldwide of which 2.53 million
suffered mortality and 64.3 million recovered.7 In an infected patient, manifestation of infection can be asymptomatic
and thus it can be difficult to diagnose active, transmissible infection..

SARS-CoV-2 is an enveloped novel β coronavirus of the Order Nidovirales and Family Coronaviridae, containing
single-stranded, positive sense RNA approximately 29.8–29.9
kb in length.8,9 SARS-CoV-2 is supported by a nucleoprotein
(N) and surrounded by a structure consisting of envelope small membrane
proteins (E), spike glycoproteins (S), and membrane proteins (M);10 see Figure 1. The virion is spherical and composed of a helical
nucleocapsid that is between 60 and 140 nm in diameter within a distinctive
envelope comprising the glycoprotein spikes (S) that range from 9
to 12 nm in length.11 These spike proteins
outside of the virion look like a solar “corona”.9.

Structure of the SARS-CoV-2 virus particle and concept
of qRT-PCR
tests of a nasal swab..

The family of coronaviruses
include those capable of causing severe
disease, such as SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, and SARS-CoV-2, and those causing
mild illness, such as HKU1, NL63, OC43, and 229E.12 SARS-CoV-2 shares 79.6% of its genetic sequence with SARS-CoV,1 which was responsible for the Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome (SARS) outbreak in 2003.13 SARS-CoV-2
has a wider community transmission than previous coronavirus outbreaks,
due to higher viral loads in the upper airway, a wider clinical spectrum
of disease increasing asymptomatic and presymptomatic viral transmission,
and enhanced binding capacity of the viral spike protein.14.

Coronaviruses have genetically adapted
and evolved to infect humans
through genetic recombination events from animal hosts such as cattle,
chickens, and, most commonly, bats.1,15 Bats are considered
to be the main natural reservoir for coronaviruses, and SARS-CoV-2
has 96.2% genetic similarity to bat β coronaviruses (SARSr-CoV;
RaTG13); however, there is still significant debate as to how humans
became infected with SARS-COV-2.16 It is
clear that the virus is zoonotic and the first cases were associated
with the “wet” Huanan seafood and wildlife market in
Wuhan City, China, of which there are considered to be two lineages—“S”
and “L”; however, what is not clear is the exact origin
or source. Many consider the virus to have genetically adapted and
jumped the species boundary to infect humans from bats via an intermediate
mammalian host.1,4,16,17.

RNA viruses
are known to have high
mutation rates which arise when they replicate; however, coronaviruses
possess an ability to proof read any errors made during replication
via a 3′ to 5′ exoribonuclease.18 This has, however, not stopped the emergence of genetic variants
of SARS-CoV-2 that could increase transmissibility of the virus.19,20 There is evidence of increased mortality in patients infected with
novel SARS-CoV-2 variants.21,22 In response to the
spread of the virus, there has been increased emphasis on tracking
emergence of variants to generate useful epidemiological data through
large scale pathogen genome sequencing.20 This had proved important in other viral epidemics such as the Ebola
outbreak in the Democratic Republic of Congo and influenza, and in
the case of SARS-CoV-2, genomic sequencing globally has revealed that
the virus has mutated from its original reference strain SARS-CoV-2
Wuhan-Hu-1.5,8,23,24 Thus, genome sequencing has played a crucial role
in aiding epidemiological understanding of SARS-CoV-2 variants and
in tackling the disease. One such success story in the area is The
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID19) Genomics UK Consortium (COG) that
was launched in March 2020 to sequence SARS-CoV-2 in up to 230,000
people with COVID-19 disease.25 This consortium
has already contributed to finding varying lineages of SARS-CoV-2
within the U.K., such as the D614G spike mutation, the globally concerning
the B.1.1.7 lineage, and the variant of concern (VOC2020/1201).26−28 Moreover, in South Africa, genome sequencing revealed a new SARS-CoV-2
variant B.1.351 which has caused further concern as the rise of such
mutations may lead to increased transmissibility and virulence of
the virus in the future.29.

Infectious
viruses such as SARS-CoV-2 are usually quantified by measurement of
viral RNA using molecular methods.30 While
this does measure the viral titer, this does not measure the exact
number of infectious virions within a given sample.31 The most accurate method of measuring infectious viral
load is through laboratory viral cultivation methods such as plaque
assays and tissue culture infectious dose (TCID)50 end point dilutions.32.

Plaque assays are quantitative assays
that detect the number of infectious SARS-CoV-2 in a given sample.
The assay is conducted via preparation of cell monolayers (cell culture)
which are infected with concentrations of the virus in a serial dilution,
and the number of plaques formed after infection are counted in plaque
forming units (PFUs).33 A plaque is formed
when a virus particle infects a host cell, replicates, and then lyses
the cell, killing it. Plaques become visible after several replication
cycles.32 The tissue culture infectious
dose assays measure the ability of the virus to induce cytopathic
effects (CPEs) in cell culture after infection. The infection is conducted
via serial dilution. TCID50 is the unit of measurement which determines
the amount of virus required to induce 50% CPE effects in susceptible
cells.34 Due to a lack of laboratory resources in clinical
settings, however, the majority of viral load quantification is conducted
via molecular methods.34,35.

Genomic sequencing and tracking
emerging strains of virus yields useful information that can be used
to develop new diagnostics and aid treatment and triage of patients
with COVID-19 disease. Controlling the pandemic is not limited to
high-income countries who have been able to afford vaccine rollout,
and thus a key part of this is ensuring that clinicians and healthcare
workers can diagnose such strains rapidly, sensitively, and specifically
in patients who have active SARS-CoV-2 and transmissible infection.5 While this is more likely in high-income countries,
developing a low-cost, easy to use diagnostic device that is able
to directly detect SARS-CoV-2 at the molecular level for use in low-
to middle-income (LMIC) settings is integral to diagnose patients
with COVID-19 disease.36 The ASSURED (affordable,
sensitive, specific, user-friendly, rapid and robust, equipment-free,
and deliverable to end users) criteria for diagnostics for use in
low-resource settings should be applied in the context of the COVID-19
pandemic.37.

Current SARS-CoV-2 testing
predominantly involves two pathways; see Figure 2. Table 1 summarizes the key characteristics and limitations
of current testing strategies. The first is direct testing of the
virus in respiratory samples, which can be conducted via viral culture,
detection of a protein subunit or via detection and/or amplification
of nucleic acids.38,39 The second relies on detection
of SARS-CoV-2 antibodies..

Summary of the main clinical testing strategies
for SARS-CoV-2.
(1) The current gold standard test in symptomatic patients is for
a nasopharyngeal swab, on which RT-PCR is performed, using two to
three primers targeting specific SARS-CoV-2 genes. Up to 40 cycles
are performed; a lower cycle threshold (CT) suggests a higher viral load. Cutoffs for a positive result vary
between assays; typically 33–35 cycles are the threshold, with
results reported as indeterminate if the threshold is reached after
a greater number of cycles. (2) In patients presenting during or after
the second week of symptoms, antibody testing may be a useful diagnostic
tool. Antibody response can be assessed using either lateral flow
tests or laboratory-based techniques such as ELISA, providing a quantitative
result. (3) Antigen testing uses immunoassays to detect specific viral
antigens. Nasopharyngeal swab samples are placed into the assays reagent.
In lateral flow antigen tests, a sample is dropped onto the absorptive
pad of the testing cassette and target viral antigens form a sandwich
complex with colloidal gold or other labeled antibodies..

Sensitivity is the ability of a
test to correctly identify people with a disease, a highly sensitive
test with a negative test result means a disease can be more confidently
ruled out. Specificity is the ability of a test to identify patients
with a disease. A highly specific test with a positive result means
a patient can be more confidently diagnosed with the disease. While
both characteristics are desirable for a diagnostic test, for the
individual especially if presenting with acute symptoms a highly sensitive
test may be more helpful as the consequences of incorrectly ruling
out a diagnosis with a false negative result outweigh those of a false
positive result. At a population level where the aim is to accurately
identify only those who have or have had a particular disease, a more
specific test is most desirable..

Real-time, reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
is considered the most sensitive and specific assay for detection
SARS-CoV-2.30,40 The assay will detect the genes
that encode the proteins that the virus is composed of, alongside
an RNA polymerase RdRp which is RNA-dependent and encoded within a
large open reading frame, ORFab.5 Importantly,
the viral genomes are contained within the virus capsid and must be
released via RNA extraction prior to molecular detection. This is
a key step in the detection procedure and can increase the turnaround
of results if being used at point of care (POC). However, a recent
paper by Alexandersen et al.5 found that
detection of RNA from clinical samples may not be an appropriate indicator
of active infection via RT-PCR as SARS-CoV-2 subgenomic RNAs could
be detected from 11 days up to 17 days after initial detection of
infection due to evidence of nuclease resistance and RNAs being protected
by cellular membranes, which could lead to inconsistent PCR positive
results.5.

The viral load in patients
increases within 5–6 days after
onset of symptoms, with viral shedding occurring 2–3 days before
the onset of symptoms.4,41 The exact viral load in infected
patients ranges between 641 and 1.43 × 1011 copies/mL,
and a median of 7.99  ×  104 in throat
samples and 7.52  ×  105 in sputum samples,
respectively.42 Thus, specimen collection
from the nasopharynx, or an oropharyngeal swab must be conducted appropriately
to capture the virus and subsequently detect it within the limit of
detection (LoD) of the assay.40.

Diagnostic
laboratory testing to identify cases rapidly and track
community spread are vital tools in gaining control of this current
global health emergency. As of Feb. 1, 2021, over 1.3 billion tests
had been carried out for SARS-CoV-2 (https://www.finddx.org/covid-19/test-tracker/)..

Here, we review the current testing used in clinical practice
and
emerging diagnostic sensor technologies. We discuss the challenges
that need to be overcome in order for laboratory sensors to become
useful in the clinic and as rapid, accurate, and cost-effective (ASSURED)
tests that are greatly needed for managing the pandemic..

Molecular tests rely on direct detection or amplification of nucleic
acids. While the “gold standard” for SARS-CoV-2 molecular
detection is quatitative reverse transcriptase–polymerase chain
reactor (qRT-PCR), other molecular tests for SARS-COV-2 are also being
developed and evaluated. Loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP)
has emerged as a viable alternative to qRT-PCR due its turnaround
time from sample to result alongside maintaining its sensitivity and
specificity without the use of a thermal cycler.43 Lamb et al.44 demonstrated detection
of SARS-CoV-2 within 30 min using a modified reverse transcriptase
LAMP assay which could be used at POC if required. Unlike qRT-PCR,
the RT-LAMP method relies on a colorimetric readout, a thermal color
change from red to yellow, when it is processed at 65 °C. This
removes the need for more expensive processing equipment, using more
simple methods to detect color change.45 We also note here the use of colorimetric biosensors in association
with nanoparticle interaction, which also provides a fast and reliable
method of detecting SARS-CoV-2 with a red shift denoting the presence
of viral surface proteins.46.

The
RT-LAMP assay was directly compared to qRT-PCR and performed optimally
with a lower LoD of 0.08 fg, which is equal to 304 viral copies.44 Lu et al.47 also
developed a RT-LAMP assay platform, named iLACO (isothermal LAMP-based
method for COVID19) that is able to detect SARS-CoV-2 at a lower limit
of 60 copies/μL in patient samples and, when compared to samples
confirmed by qRT-PCR, demonstrated 97.6% sensitivity. A mismatch-tolerant
RT-MALP assay has also been developed to detect SARS-CoV-2 where a
high-fidelity DNA polymerase is used to remove the mismatched base
pairs in the LAMP process.47 The assay
allowed improved accuracy of detection of 30 RNA copies of viral gene RdRp within approximately 40 min and showed 100% consistency
when compared to the standard qRT-PCR assay. Finally, another RT-LAMP
assay developed by Zhang et al.48 demonstrated
a LoD of ∼120 copies or 4.8 copies/μL, which also shows
the sensitivity and specificity of this assay. Thus, RT-LAMP assays
are a suitable alternative to qRT-PCR assays..

Interestingly,
combining RT-LAMP with CRISPR (clustered regularly
interspaced short palindromic repeats) technology is another molecular
diagnostic method that is gaining traction for detection of SARS-CoV-2.
A study by Broughton et al.49 demonstrated
that SARS-CoV-2 could be detected by combining RT-LAMP with CRISPR-Cas12a
in a lateral flow assay format within 40 min from respiratory swab
RNA extracts. This CRISPR-Cas12 DETECTR technology demonstrated similar
sensitivity and specificity to qRT-PCR assays, detecting 1 ×
104 copies/mL; however, an RNA extraction step was required
prior to utilization of the test.49 CRISPR
and Cas proteins identify and break down any foreign nucleic acids
encountered by bacteria and archaea, acting as a form of adaptive
immunity for these microorganisms. The degradation of these foreign
nucleic acids is mediated via specific RNA molecules which activate
the Cas nucleases to cleave any single-stranded DNA (ssDNA). Thus,
the CRISPR Cas systems can be exploited for use in detection by use
of ssDNA reporters that can detect this cleavage and generate a readout.50 Huang et al.51 also
developed a similar qRT-PCR, CRISPR-Cas12a assay which was able to
detect two copies of RNA per sample, which, when compared to the qRT-PCR,
was unable to detect less than five copies of the RNA target.51 Guo et al. have also developed an integrated
viral nucleic acid detection platform- CASdetect (CRISPR assisted
detection) for SARS-CoV-2.52 The assay
utilizes Cas12b-mediated DNA detection methods to detect a limit of
1 × 104 copies/mL of virus without cross-reactivity,
similar to the previous studies described above. However, interestingly,
authors recognized the need to liberate the RNA from the capsid and
thus tested genome spin column extraction kits against lysis buffer
kits, finding that lysis buffer kits would be more useful for POC
testing (POCT) and spin columns useful for hospitals.52 Authors also attempted to make the CASdetect more suitable
for use at POC by developing a blue light box which could be used
to determine the fluorescent signal generated in the presence of SARS-CoV-2..

Recently, Ning et al.53 developed a
chip-based CRISPR-Cas12a technique of saliva tests for COVID-19 detection.
The system exhibits complete concordance with qRT-PCR results and
is equipped with a smartphone-based microscopic device that may allow
reduction of the infrastructure and expertise required to obtain ultrasensitive
diagnostics tools..

Testing
for SARS-CoV-2 within
primary care and the community is essential to prevent further community
transmission. This requires expansion of current testing capacity,
and while this has been achieved somewhat by setting up SARS-CoV-2
testing laboratories,54 this expansion
requires accurate development and implementation of rapid POC tests
for SARS-CoV-2. The diagnostic sensitivity of rapid POC molecular
tests for SARS-CoV-2 must be comparable to those of gold standard
qRT-PCR tests and have limited steps for ease of use (ASSURED diagnostics).37 Another key stumbling block for development
of such rapid POC tests is the first step of nucleic acid extraction,
which can increase the duration of the POC itself. Moreover, high-quality
clinical specimens are essential to enable detection of the virus
in clinical samples.38.

CovidNudge
is an example of a novel, integrated gene detection system that utilizes
RT-PCR in 90 min to detect SARS-CoV-2 without need for laboratory
handling, thus negating risk to healthcare workers, and does not require
sample preprocessing.55 The assay is multiplexed
to be able to detect seven viral targets (rdrp1, rdrp2, e-gene, n-gene,
and n1, n2, and n3 genes) within a self-contained DnaCartridge that
comprises a lab-on-chip device which enables a sample to result PCR
reaction. The cartridge contains a staple preparation unit, with all
buffers to extract and purify the RNA, and an amplification unit.
The CovidNudge test was found to be able to detect SARS-CoV-2 with
a specificity of 100%, and a sensitivity of 94% when compared to laboratory-based
testing. However, the time taken for testing alongside the needed
RNA extraction step, despite being integrated, may not be appropriate
for use within a shorter period of time, such as within the time of
a general practitioner’s (GP’s) appointment (∼15
min) or when results are required immediately. This is where the majority
of molecular POC diagnostics tests fall short..

Lab-on-chip technologies
have also been used to detect SARS-CoV-2
and represent an efficient means of detecting the virus molecularly.
Label-free electrochemical detection of SARS-CoV-2 was reported by
Rodriguez-Manzano et al.,56 where an ion-sensitive
field-effect transistor (ISFET) was used and was comparable to testing
with qRT-PCR; however, while the device was able to detect RNA within
20 min, the RNA from the samples had been extracted prior to testing
and thus this does not represent a raw sample to result turnaround.
Such devices are discussed in more detail in Virus
Sensor Technologies..

Other promising POC technologies
include use of nucleic acid and
aptamer-based biosensors, such as plasmonics and localized surface
plasmon resonance to generate detection signals. A good example of
this is the use of dual function plasmonic biosensor to detect SARS-CoV-2
within clinical samples, as described by Qiu et al.57 This biosensor is able to detect viral RNA sequences RdRp,
ORF1ab, and the E genes from SARS-CoV-2 at a lower LoD of 0.22 pM
in a multiplexed assay; the specifics of this device are discussed
below. The use of plasmonics and DNA sequences to capture nucleic
acid targets from varying microorganisms has been proven prior and
represents a highly sensitive, specific, and efficient means of molecular
detection of pathogens, but also uses microwave energy to liberate
nucleic acids from the sample within seconds, rather than relying
on other longer nucleic acid extraction methods. A POC device that
could generate a highly sensitive and specific result, comparable
to qRT-PCR, from raw sample, ideally within 15 min, would be immensely
useful within the POC testing diagnostic sphere..

Despite the
emergence of newer SARS-CoV-2 diagnostics, real-time
reverse transcription has remained the gold standard worldwide in
the diagnosis of COVID-19.30,58−62 U.K. government data showed a total of 63.5 million RT-PCR tests
for SARS-CoV-2 had been conducted between April 2020 and January 2021,
with daily testing capacity rising 30-fold during this time, up to
800,000 tests a day (https://coronavirus.data.gov.uk/details/testing). The process involves reverse transcription of ribonucleic acid
(RNA) and amplification of nucleic acid for subsequent analysis (NAATs).
Corman et al. were the first team to finalize an international protocol
and outline standards associated with the test.30 They recommended using primers targeting one or several
nucleic acids related to SARS-CoV-2.30,58 These targets
aimed to increase the sensitivity of the test to SARS-CoV-2 and minimize
cross-reactivity with other known coronaviruses. The U.S. Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) assesses for two regions
of the viral nucleocapsid gene N1 and N2 and for human RNase P gene
(https://www.cdc.gov/), whereas,
the World Health Organisation (WHO) tests for SARS-CoV-2 RNA-dependent
RNA polymerase and envelope (E) genes..

The use of multiple primer/probes
in the RT-PCR technique means
that it is unlikely to be significantly affected by mutations seen
in SARS-CoV-2 genetic variants. For example, the TaqPath RT-PCT COVID-19
test uses three primer/probe sets to different genomic regions (Gene
Orf-1ab, N protein, and S protein), so, unless mutations occur at
all three regions, variants are still likely to be detected. Indeed,
the change in the signature of the response to one of the three primers
used helped to raise suspicion of the British variant (B.1.1.7).63 Once mutated variants are identified, RT-PCR
tests can be rapidly adapted to include primers sequences to detect
the new strain.64,65 However, the likelihood of false
negatives would be expected to increase with increasing number of
mutation sites in techniques targeting fewer genomic regions..

There have been multiple systematic reviews on sample collection;
a meta-analysis from Mohammadi et al. concluded that sputum samples
were the most sensitive for SARS-CoV-2 detection with nasopharyngeal
second and oropharyngeal the least effective.62 However, given the dry nature of cough and reduced sputum production,
the nasopharyngeal swab has become the gold standard internationally.
There have been concerns raised about the false negative rate of the
RT-PCR method with samples from the nasopharynx. Various studies have
put its sensitivity between 61 and 70%. These results have been explained
by inconsistent sampling methods, a variety of different and sometimes
not standardized kits, difficulties in preparation methods, and shortages
of correct transport medium. RT-PCR testing remains the primary diagnostic
test in confirming a diagnosis of COVID-19 in symptomatic individuals
presenting to healthcare centers. Limitations in sensitivity result
in the requirement for repeated testing in patients with presumed
false negative results when there is a high clinical suspicion for
disease and other supporting positive diagnostic features such as
typical radiographic changes..

The other unclear variable is
viral load. Most studies have concluded
that it peaks within the first 2 weeks of infection. There is even
less data and analysis of sensitivity in asymptomatic carriers or
those with very few respiratory symptoms. This is a concerning pitfall
as RT-PCR testing is being used to screen patients attending healthcare
centers for elective procedures or with non-COVID-related acute presentations.
With a high-community prevalence of asymptomatic infection and the
possibility of transmission prior to symptom onset, there will be
significant numbers of false negative tests among this patient cohort,
leaving vulnerable hospitalized patients at risk of nosocomial infection..

There are also other pitfalls of this method. Despite the rapid
emergence of miniturized RT-PCR testing capabilities to aid worldwide
use of the test, some countries lack the laboratories and personnel
to rely effectively and scale up to this form of mass testing. All
of these factors have led to a shift in diagnostics to overcome these
shortfalls..

Coronavirus-19
antigens have
been shown to be detectable in the serum, urine, and mucous membranes
of patients with early COVID-19 infection. The presence of antigen,
through rapid detection testing (RDT), holds promise as an effective
strategy for the early diagnosis and isolation of confirmed cases.66 Rapid COVID-19 antigen testing operates on the
basis of lateral flow to detect viral antigen through immobilized
coated COVID-19 antibody. This POC testing is appealing not only for
its speed but also for its replicability and low cost. However, the
use of RDT for other viral infections such as influenza has historically
shown variable sensitivity and therefore been extrapolated to concern
for rapid antigen testing in the diagnosis of COVID-19.59 A recent Cochrane review conducted concluded
that POC antigen testing for COVID-19 had an average sensitivity and
specificity of 56.2% (95% CI, 29.5–79.8%) and 99.5% (95% CI,
98.1–99.1%), respectively.67 The
variability in the sensitivity of POC antigen testing has proven to
be operator-dependent with lower results attained when testing is
performed by nontrained personnel. Peto68 suggests that further work is required to determine the level of
training that nontrained personnel require to achieve optimal test
performance. Furthermore, the false negative rates for rapid antigen
testing are predominately confounded by the viral load variability
during the course of a patient’s COVID-19 illness.58,69 Therefore, it is recommended that centers using large scale POC
antigen testing to identify asymptomatic carriers should have all
patients with negative results confirmed against COVID-19 RT-PCR to
mitigate for potential false negatives,70 limiting the clinical usefulness of such tests. Published data are
lacking on the performance of lateral flow antigen tests in detecting
novel strains, although a WHO statement reports no significant impact
on performance (https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/2020-DON305)..

Monitoring the humoral immune response
to SARS-CoV-2 infection enables the diagnosis of COVID-19 in patients
presenting during or after the second week of symptom onset. However,
the clinical utility of such a test is limited, when RT-PCR testing
is readily available and accessible within the first 5–7 days
of symptoms and has a greater positivity rate (see Figure 3).71 The low sensitivity of antibody testing in the first week of symptom
onset means they have no role in early case identification to halt
transmission. This reflects that the median time to seroconversion
is between 12 and 13 days.72 Antibody response
remains detectable for about 4.5 months in a sampled healthcare worker
population,73 although symptomatic and
more severe infections appear to produce higher antibody titers74 and a prolonged immune response.75.

Time relationship between viral load, symptoms, and positivity
on diagnostic tests. The onset of symptoms (day 0) is usually 5 days
after infection. At this early stage corresponding to the window or
asymptomatic period, the viral load could be below the RT-PCR threshold
and the test may give false negative results. The same is true at
the end of the disease, when the patient is recovering. Seroconversion
is variable but may be as early as day 5 with a median between days
10 and 14; in the first week of the disease serological tests are
more likely to give false negative results. The dotted black line
in the graph illustrates the sensitivity of the chemiluminescent assay
as derived from the data sheet of a commercial test (Abbott Diagnostics,
USA). Ig, immunoglobulin; RT-PCR, reverse transcription-PCR; SARS-CoV-2,
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2. Reprinted with permission
from ref (58). Copyright
2020 Elsevier..

In the subgroup of patients who
present in their second week after
symptoms onset, a not infrequent occurrence such as deterioration
requiring hospitalization is common around 10 days; the adjunct of
serological testing to RT-PCR improves diagnostic accuracy in COVID-19
diagnosis.76.

Antibody testing for
SARS-CoV-2 infection includes enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays (ELISA), chemiluminescence immune assays (CLIA),
and lateral flow testing. The foundation for innovative diagnostics
lists 625 immunoassay tests from 331 different manufacturers. 461
tests have received approval for use in the European Union (CE-IVD)
and 42 U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Emergency Use Authorization
(https://www.finddx.org/covid-19/pipeline). Clinical data assessing the diagnostic characteristics of these
tests are available only for the minority,77−82 and in some published data identification of the specific test used
has been censored.83.

Antibody testing
typically identifies IgM and IgG antibody to SARS-CoV-2
either separately or in combination, IgM being the first level to
rise and fall and IgG later to rise but sustaining a longer response.84,85 Fewer tests use the IgA antibody. The majority of tests identify
the antibodies made against the viral nucleocapsid (NC) protein, but
antibodies against the spike protein may be more specific due to potential
cross-reactivity with other coronaviruses of the NC protein..

A Cochrane review of 54 studies showed that the specificity of
the antibody tests was consistently over 98% with similar results
for IgA of 98.7% (95% CI 97.2–99.4), IgG of 99.1% (98.3–99.6),
and combined IgA/IgG of 98.7% (97.2–99.4). The sensitivity
of the tests showed greater variability; the combined IgM/IgG tests
performing best at 22–35 days post symptom onset, 96.0% (90.6–98.3).
POC serological testing had lower sensitivity than laboratory-based
tests.86,87 There are significant limitations in the
studies assessing antibody diagnostic test accuracy. First, the majority
of these studies were conducted in hospitalized patients and true
COVID-19 cases defined on the basis of a positive RT-PCR positive
test, risking inclusion of false positives and potentially underestimating
test sensitivity..

The major use of antibody testing is in population
level studies
to assess infection prevalence and the impacts of public health policy;88−90 thus most antibody tests are being carried out in a nonhospitalized
and predominantly asymptomatic population. The characteristics of
time to seroconversion and level of antibody response appear to be
different between the severe infection hospitalized groups versus
an asymptomatic population,73,91 which makes the generalizability
of the test characteristics assessed from hospitalized and symptomatic
patient serum questionable.92.

Most
licensing of these tests for emergency use exemption requires
a minimum standard of 98% specificity, but one study of 10 lateral
flow antibody testing kits identified only 4 of these that met this
standard.93 When conducting mass screening
of the population, specificity of greater than 98% may still not be
sufficient for the test to be useful. The positive predictive value
(PPV) of such a test when the prevalence is 10% is estimated at about
80%;92 1 in 5 positive results will be
a false positive. Assuming a prevalence similar to that reported by
the Office for National Statistics for the population of England,
about 2%, the PPV of an antibody test approaches 50% (see U.K. Office
for National Statistics, COVID 19 Infection Survery)..

Antibody testing
has the potential role of testing vaccine effectiveness: identifying
those who may require additional “booster” doses along
with estimating the length of immunity conferred by vaccination. Future
SARS-CoV-2 vaccine development and licensing may rely on this approach.
However, this remains an area of much uncertainty and ongoing research.
The mRNA vaccines (Pfizer-BioNTech94,95 and Moderna96) and the Oxford/Astra-Zeneca vaccine97,98 induce an antibody response to the receptor binding domain of the
SARS-CoV-2 spike protein; antinucleocapsid (N) protein antibodies
are only produced after native SARS-CoV-2 infection.99,100 Measurement of the functional effectiveness of the antibody response
to vaccination is via a plaque reduction neutralization technique
(PRNT) which is labor intensive and expensive and requires level 3
biosafety as live virus is required.101 Other surrogate/pseudotyped neutralization tests have been developed,
but remain challenging to deploy on scale.102 The correlation of quantitative antispike protein antibody levels
to functional neutralization tests offers hope that antibody testing
could be used reliably to assess vaccine response.103,104 Results from a range of five quantitative serological assays showed
good agreement in identifying those patients with a negative viral
neutralization test (i.e., lacking functional protection postvaccination),
but further standardization between serological assays and a larger
data set is required before we can reliably interpret these results
in a clinically meaningful way.105 Laboratory-based
serological testing using ELISA or chemiluminescence immunoassays
(CLIAs) has been used in the majority of the studies investigating
antibody response postvaccination; the utility of lateral flow tests
or other POC modalities remains to be established..

RT-PCR and viral antigen testing is most
commonly carried out using nasopharyngeal or combined nasal and throat
swab specimens. A recent meta-analysis taking nasopharyngeal swabs
as the gold standard showed combined nasal and throat swabs had a
sensitivity of 97%.106 Alternative specimen
samples using saliva or nasal only swabs showed reduced sensitivities
of 85 and 86%, respectively, therefore missing 15% of infected cases.
Anal swabs and stool samples have also been investigated, detecting
viral particles shed into the gastrointestinal (GI) tract.107 GI specimens have the potential advantage of
extending the detection window of infection beyond that of upper airway
swabs. However, clinically the emergence of antibody testing has thankfully
filled this niche..

Current diagnostic testing relies on specimens
that are uncomfortable and in some, e.g., infants or people living
with dementia, may be challenging to obtain. Additionally while self-testing
has become the norm for many people, healthcare worker sampling is
superior but incurs additional cost and a personal protective equipment
burden. Superior diagnostic performance versus RT-PCR using less invasive
samples such as saliva or tongue swabs should be the goal for novel
diagnostic technologies if there is to be a paradigm shift in diagnostic
pathways..

The COVID-19
pandemic has revealed that novel SARS-CoV-2 sensors
and detection methods are urgently needed, especially in developing
countries where access to tests performed in clinical laboratories
is limited. Factors such as cost, access, healthcare, complexity of
assays, assay time, and difficulty in collecting the samples make
widespread testing difficult. Electrical, mechanical, and optical
biosensor devices can alleviate some of these problems, enabling more
rapid and assured assays at a lower cost, with less sample preparation,
meaning a clinical laboratory is not required. Biosensor devices are
versatile and can be used for POC and home testing. As we show in Table 2, there are many different
types of sensors that are useful for detecting virus material and
viral particles, with potential for developing much-needed and improved
sensing assays for SARS-CoV-2 detection. Recently, efforts have intensified
to develop SARS-CoV-2 biosensor devices and to improve upon their
accuracy and sensitivity. Current approaches show that it is possible
to reduce the time for analysis and achieve a high detection sensitivity
on platforms suitable for developing POC applications..

Asterisks (*) mark technologies
demonstrated for SARS-CoV-2 detection..

We identify three important steps for developing electrical,
optical,
and mechanical SARS-CoV-2 biosensor devices. The first step is the
identification of a suitable biorecognition element, such as an antibody
that is able to make a specific molecular interaction with the SARS-CoV-2
target. Examples include virus capsid protein, human angiotensin-converting
enzyme 2 (ACE2)108 and aptamers109 that target SARS-CoV-2. The specific biomarker
targets for detecting SARS-CoV-2 infection include human immunoglobulins
and specific virus proteins such as the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein,
which can be important to target mutations such as the D614G mutation.109 The SARS-CoV-2 RNA genome currently serves
as the key target for detecting the virus in most clinical assays
that make use of RT-PCR.110 In general,
the analysis of protein samples typically requires a much larger amount
of sample as compared to RT-PCR tests of the RNA genome.110.

The second step in SARS-CoV-2 biosensor
development is the identification
of a suitable linker to immobilize the biorecognition element to the
sensor. The biological recognition element has to be immobilized in
such a way that the transducer produces a large signal output when
the target biomarker/molecule interacts or binds to the bioreceptor.
Ideally, bioreceptors are immobilized on the sensor in a stable, oriented,
and reproducible way to enable a consistent sensor performance. Multiple
linkers and various immobilization techniques for biosensors have
been used in the past years: streptavidin–biotin interactions,
electrodeposition, physisorption, and chemisorption (see, e.g., ref (111)) are some of the examples.
These immobilization techniques can provide dense and accessible monolayers
of bioreceptors which are desired for more sensitive detection..

The third step in biosensor development is to optimize the signal
readout and the signal analysis methods. Many different types of transducers
find use for SARS-CoV-2 detection. They include plasmonic optical
transducers such as surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) based
lateral flow immunoassays (LFIAs), mechanical transducers such as
quartz crystal microbalances (QCMs), and electrical transducers such
as nanowire or graphene-based field-effect transistors and electrochemical
sensors. Various methods are employed to optimize their signals together
with computational algorithms for improving the signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) and the LoD.112 In the next subsections,
we review the main optical, electrical, and mechanical virus sensor
devices that are currently being investigated and that can be adapted
for SARS-CoV-2 detection, before reviewing those sensors that have
already been used for SARS-CoV-2 detection in the section SARS-CoV-2 Electrical, Mechanical, and Optical Detection
Technologies..

In this subsection,
we review a
class of sensors which operate by detecting virus biomarkers from
changes in their electric characteristics, i.e., through current,
conductance, resistance, or impedance measurements. We review the
most recent advances in viral sensing, together with the seminal contributions
to the field of electrical sensors..

The first electrical transducers
reported in 2001113 made use of conductance
changes for real-time sensing of biological and chemical species.
They were based on nanowire sensing elements made from silicon. This
work set the stage for further developments and applications in this
class of nanowire sensors, which is now being explored for SARS-CoV-2
detection..

Work by
Cui et al.113 introduced the functional
principles of how semiconductor nanowire sensors work in biosensing.
Semiconductors exposed to different media can change their electrical
properties, e.g., via shifts of the valence band away from the Fermi
level, resulting in hole depletion and a reduced conductance.114.

Binding of biomolecules to the surface
of a nanowire leads to the depletion or accumulation of carriers in
the “bulk” of the nanowire (versus only the surface
region of a planar device). According to ref (113), the conductance response
of silicon nanowire-based electrical sensors for biotin–streptavidin
interaction can reach ∼10–8 siemens, which
corresponds to a concentration range down to picomolar. This high
sensitivity allows for single-virus detection, as we will discuss
in the following sections. Also, the small size of a nanowire suggests
that dense arrays of sensors could be prepared, facilitating real-time,
rapid, and multiplexed detection of different biomarkers on integrated
electrical sensor chips..

Lieber et al. used electrical biosensors
based on nanowire field-effect
transistors for direct and real-time detection of single particles
of influenza A virus.115 The sensor schematic
is shown in Figure 4. The field-effect transistor with a nanowire-based sensing element,
“gate oxide”, demonstrated dependence of conductivity
upon binding of single influenza A virus particles. Conductance changes
up to −20 nS were observed for single influenza A virus binding
events, producing a step in the conductance time trace easily visible
against the noise of a few nS. Virus binding and unbinding events
could be clearly observed from downward and upward steps in the conductance
trace. To verify the binding/unbinding events, fluorescence imaging
of single virus particles was performed in parallel and compared with
the real-time sensing data, as shown in Figure 4. Results for the specific detection of influenza
A virus and avian adenovirus group III were compared, with high selectivity
demonstrated by using antihemagglutinin receptors for influenza A
detection and antiadenovirus group III antibody for adenovirus detection.
The antibodies were covalently attached to the nanowire sensor. For
antibody immobilization, the nanowire device was exposed to an ethanol
solution of 3-(trimethoxysilyl)propyl aldehyde, washed, and heated.
After this step, the two sets of monoclonal antibodies were chemically
linked via their amine groups with the aldehyde-terminated nanowire
surfaces in a phosphate buffer solution. Device arrays for multiplexed
experiments were made in the same way, except that distinct antibody
solutions were spotted on different regions of the array..

Nanowire-based
detection of single viruses. (Left) Schematic shows
two nanowire devices, 1 and 2, where the nanowires are modified with
different antibody receptors. Specific binding of a single virus to
the receptors on nanowire 2 produces a conductance change characteristic
of the surface charge of the virus only in nanowire 2. When the virus
unbinds from the surface, the conductance returns to the baseline
value. (Right) Single virus binding selectivity. Simultaneous conductance
and optical versus time data recorded from a single-nanowire device
with a high density of anti-influenza type A antibody. Influenza A
solution was added before point 1, and the solution was switched to
pure buffer between points 4 and 5 on the plot. The bright-field and
fluorescence images corresponding to time points 1–8 are indicated
in the conductance data; the viruses appear as red dots in the images.
Each image is 6.5 × 6.5 μm2. Reprinted with
permission from ref (115). Copyright 2004 National Academy of Sciences..

Field-effect transistors, as well as three-electrode potentiometric
and amperometric systems, have potentially wide application as sensors
for the detection of pathogens because they are compatible with CMOS
manufacturing techniques and, therefore, can be potentially integrated
with other electronics and in portable devices. Already, this class
of sensors has found use in combination with smart phones for detecting
Zika virus.129 Note that mobile phones
are becoming one of the crucial nonpharmaceutical interventions, which
have slowed down the epidemic in many settings; an interesting perspective
article about the role of mobile phones in fighting the COVID-19 pandemic
can be found in ref (130)..

An important advance toward real-world applications of the
nanowire
sensor array was made by Shen et al.116 In contrast to ref (115), they developed silicon nanowire sensors for influenza A (H3N2 and
H1N1) virus in breath samples. This was possible by passing the liquid
condensate obtained from exhaled breath onto the nanowires. The breath
condensate samples were collected from a total of 19 human subjects
with and without flu symptoms. The collection procedure involved the
patient breathing through the mouth onto a cold hydrophobic surface
for 5 min. The collected samples were further diluted for the experiments..

For sample delivery, they used a single channel with an inlet and
outlet made of poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) and covering the entire
nanowire sensor area (∼4 μm wide). This breath-analysis
sensor demonstrates a high sensitivity for detection down to 29 virus
particles/μL of the 100-fold diluted condensate. The approach
also demonstrated a high selectivity and accuracy: for 90% of cases,
it was observed that samples tested positive or negative in accordance
with the gold standard method qRT-PCR that was used as the control.
The flu diagnosis with the electrical sensors took 2 orders of magnitude
less time as compared to the RT-qPCR method..

Another class of
silicon-based electrical sensors for virus detection
is based on AC electrical impedance measurements. Influenza virus
particles have been detected with double-etched porous silicon,117 as illustrated in Figure 5. Porous silicon is a promising material
for sensing due to its high surface area, which provides high surface/volume
ratio for binding of viral particles to specific receptors, together
with the tunability of pore morphology which can be important for
the sample delivery. Fabrication of porous silicon is accessible with
standard methods and mostly done by electrochemical etching.117 The porous silicon is then covered with metal
electrodes for impedance measurements with a vector network analyzer.
The background conductance of the etched silicon is negligible, while
impedance of the whole circuit is mostly governed by capacitance of
the etched silicon and this provides enough sensitivity for the direct
measurements of viral particle concentrations..

Double-etched porous
silicon with gold electrode deposited: cross-section
(A) and top view with a H1N1 virus particle (B). (C) Voltage amplitude
versus frequency of the sensor depending on virus concentration. Reprinted
with permission from ref (117). Copyright 2020 The Authors, published by Elsevier..

In experiments with the porous silicon sensors,117 influenza virus strain A/PR/8/1934 (H1N1) stock
solution,
with initial concentration of about 107 TCID50, was used,
which indicates 50% tissue culture infective dose in 1 mL. The stock
solution was diluted in 0.9% NaCl to adjust the concentrations of
viruses to 0.1 TCID50, 100 TCID50, and 1000 TCID50. The prepared 1
mL virus suspension was aerosolized with a nebulizer for 5 min into
a closed volume in which the porous silicon sensors were placed; no
biorecognition elements were used. Figure 5c shows voltage dependences on the AC oscillation
frequency before and after adsorption of virions at different concentrations.
The increase in the capacitance is caused by infiltration of viruses
into the porous structure that leads to a shift of resonance frequency
to lower values (about 30 MHz change). This sensor showed stable results
after only 5 min exposure to the viral aerosol. A similar approach
has potential for use in coronavirus detection. A simple advantage
of this sensor is that it can be reused after washing in ethanol;
measurements were reproducible at least 10 times..

Apart
from silicon-based materials, tin-doped WO3/In2O3 nanowires can serve as virus biosensors,121 having detected hepatitis B virus. For this,
single-stranded DNA oligonucleotides were covalently immobilized on
the sensor to detect the hybridization of complementary DNA in a label-free
approach through electrochemical impedance spectral measurements..

The same class of In2O3 sensors have been used
to detect SARS-CoV virus N-protein.122 Each
of four major proteins (envelope protein, membrane protein, nucleocapsid
(N) protein, and spike protein)131 plays
a role in the virus structure and is involved in the mechanism of
the replication cycle. Long before the COVID-19 pandemic, authors
of ref (122) introduced
antibody mimic proteins in experiments of in vitro selection as a
new class of biorecognition element for SARS biomarker N proteins
in biosensors on the basis of the In2O3 nanowires.
Upon binding of N proteins, changes in the electric current were registered.
This platform was capable of specifically detecting the N protein
at sub-nanomolar concentrations, in the presence of 44 μM bovine
serum albumin as a background..

A gold nanoparticle-decorated
graphene field-effect transistor
has been proposed for the detection of biotinylated macromolecules
with ultrahigh sensitivity and specificity.132 The authors employed an avidin–biotin technology to demonstrate
the specific detection of biotinylated proteins and nucleotides in
the sub-picomolar range. The graphene/Au nanoparticles were fabricated
on a Si substrate. Their sensing performance was characterized by
real-time two-terminal electrical current measurement upon injection
of the analyte solution into a silicon pool preattached onto the electrodes.
The sensing capability of the composite was tested with the biotinylated
protein A, with sensitivity of ∼0.4 pM achieved. By selection
of corresponding linkers, this platform could be useful for coronavirus
detection as well..

A QCM is a label-free technique that has been
developed for several
decades for biosensing applications. The key component of QCM is a
thin quartz crystal that oscillates at a resonant frequency under
applied voltage. In response to binding/unbinding events, the QCM
frequency is decreased/increased in accordance with the Sauerbrey
equation. These frequency changes are proportional to the mass of
materials attached to the sensor. QCM sensors have potential for coronavirus
detection with sensitivity down to units of virus particles per mL
or nanograms per cm2. QCM-D provides an additional characteristic
for sensing, namely, the rate of dissipation. This characteristic
is defined as the rate of oscillation coming to rest when the applied
voltage was switched off. Thus, the dissipation rate could provide
the rigidity of the materials attached; i.e., soft materials will
tend to dissipate oscillations more readily..

Prior to the COVID-19
pandemic, QCM biosensors have been developed for the detection of
influenza A (H3N2) virus particles.123 The biosensor consists of a bioreceptor coupled
to a QCM transducer that translates a biorecognition event into a
measurable frequency-shift signal. Self-assembled monolayers of mercaptoundecanoic
acid were formed on QCM gold electrodes to provide a surface amenable
for the immobilization of anti-influenza A antibodies by using NHS/EDC
coupling chemistry. Influenza A virions were aerosolized; for this,
a nebulizer directly connected to a chamber housing the antibody-modified
crystal, a so-called immunochip, was used. Upon exposure to the aerosolized
virus, the interaction between the antibody and virus led to a change
and damping of the oscillation frequency of the QCM sensor. The magnitude
of the frequency change was directly related to the virus concentration.
The LoD was estimated to be 4 virus particles/mL..

Another example
of virus particle detection with QCM has been demonstrated
by Cooper et al.124 Type 1 herpes simplex
virus has been chosen as the target. The virions were covalently attached
to the microbalance surface and then detached by changing the amplitude
of the QCM oscillations. Single virions were detected, on the basis
of the registration of changes in the frequency of oscillations; however,
the surface preparation is a complex multistage process. The microbalance
surface was coated with a layer of chromium providing high-adhesive
properties, a thick layer of gold for high conductance, and then a
monolayer of mercaptoundecanoic acid to provide free carboxylic acid
groups to the solution phase. These groups were converted to reactive N-hydroxysuccinimide esters and coupled to an anti-gD IgG
monoclonal antibody to detect the 120 nm herpes simplex virus particle
by binding the virus-specific membrane glycoproteins, including glycoprotein
D (gD)..

The field of photonic biosensing has
grown rapidly in recent years and presents many opportunities to expand
COVID-19 testing rapidly and efficiently. Several biomarkers have
been utilized for virus detection including viral genomic material,57,133 surface membrane proteins,126,134 and label-free detection
of intact virions,128,135 the former two of which require
a receptor which differentiates viruses and immobilizes the target.
A wide variety of sensing methods based on the effect of the interaction
between target biomarkers and light are discussed, focusing on optical
biosensors already proven to detect viruses including SARS-CoV-2 virions.
Such methods provide direct, real-time measurements and high levels
of sensitivity, as can be seen in Table 2..

Individual intact viruses can be directly detected
using whispering
gallery mode (WGM) resonators (WGRs), which are facilitated by the
trapping of light from a tunable laser by total internal reflection
at a resonant wavelength in a spherical microcavity (Figure 6). Analyte binding perturbs
the evanescent field of the mode resulting in a resonant wavelength
shift. This reactive sensing mechanism has been used to detect the
binding of single influenza A virions to the surface of a WGM silica
microsphere resonator with LoD ∼ 10 fM, allowing an accurate
lower bound estimate of virus mass and radius to be calculated.128 Influenza A and SARS-CoV-2 virions have similar
radii (∼100 nm); hence, this method holds potential for development
in SARS-CoV-2 detection. Such a method has detected virions as small
as MS2 virus, with a mass of ∼1% of influenza A through nanoplasmonic
hybridization of the WGM at the microsphere surface. A plasmonic nanoparticle,
such as a gold nanoshell, attached to the microresonator equator enhances
sensitivity136 via localized surface plasmon
resonance (LSPR). The resonant oscillation of surface conduction electrons
stimulated by photons increases electric field intensity, providing
enhanced sensitivity within a small detection volume associated with
the LSPR hotspot.57,136 However, the ability to distinguish
between viruses of similar mass, shape, and size usually requires
functionalization with receptors to provide specificity..

Experimental
setup for a microsphere optical cavity, coupled to
a tunable laser using a tapered optical fiber. Label-free detection
of single influenza A virus particles was achieved using this WGM
sensor. Inset graph demonstrates a resonant mode as a dip in the transmission
spectrum. Single virus particles perturb the WGM resonance wavelength
and shift the transmission dip. Reprinted with permission from ref (128). Copyright 2008 National
Academy of Sciences..

Specific sensing using
WGRs was demonstrated using thiol-modified
nucleotides conjugated to gold nanorods on the surface of a WGM microsphere.
The hybridization kinetics of nucleotides, including base mismatches
in octamers, were detected with concentrations between 10 and 100
nM.133 Cysteamine detection with LoD in
the 100 aM range has been reported; hence, WGRs have potential as
extremely sensitive photonic sensors.137 The typical viral load in patient saliva has been reported to average
between 105 and 106 SARS-CoV-2 virus particles
per mL, corresponding to a concentration of ∼0.2–2 fM.138 Currently, WGM-based techniques are often diffusion-limited;
however, the integration of microfluidics using liquid core waveguides139 has the potential to further lower LoDs and
provides a gateway for transferring this technology into portable
devices for POC testing. For example, Dantham et al.136 utilized microfluidic channels to pump MS2 virus solution
through a chamber containing a microsphere, and external referencing
optofluidic microbubble resonator systems have been proven effective
for specific detection of biomolecules such as d-biotin.140.

Specificity and speed in detection are
of the utmost importance
if a sensor is to have potential use in widespread testing in a pandemic.
A Mach–Zehnder-type optical waveguide made from sol–gel
detected single influenza A virions with concentration of 100 μg/mL
within 15 min.141 The device used a single-mode
fiber white light source coupled into the waveguide, with output power
and wavelength monitored. Anti-H1N1/HA1 antibody was immobilized on
one arm of the device, with the other arm left unfunctionalized. When
influenza A virus particles were added to the arm hybridized with
antibodies, virus–antibody binding resulted in a refractive
index (RI) shift, with resulting power loss and wavelength shift detected
by an optical spectrum analyzer. Wavelength and power of light passing
through the unfunctionalized arm are unaffected, hence providing a
reference measurement.141 Reference measurements
are useful to subtract background signals and reduce noise.140.

U-bent optical fibers are another low-cost,
portable method of
photonic detection utilizing the change in RI resulting from a molecule
binding to the sensor. The optical fiber is coupled to an LED or laser,
with a spectrometer measuring the output light and subsequent increased
absorbance upon molecule binding. The bend in the fiber increases
the penetration depth of the evanescent field of light into the analyte,
increasing detection sensitivity by an order of magnitude. Gold nanoparticles
bound to the fiber surface further enhance sensitivity via the LSPR
mechanism.142 Huang et al.134 used a similar approach to detect SARS-CoV
nucleocapsid protein with LoD of 0.1 pg/mL. The LSPR electric field
enhancement due to an AuNP on the fiber surface enhanced the fluorescence
of a fluorophore bound antibody conjugated to the AuNP when excited
by a laser beam. Using a low bandpass filter and photodetector, fluorescence
intensity was measured when SARS-CoV nucleocapsid protein bound to
its complementary antibody.134 More recently,
a plasmonic fiberoptic absorbance biosensor (P-FAB), with a similar
design, has been developed on the basis of this technique.143 This low-cost, portable system provides huge
potential for point-of-care testing, as proposed by Murugan et al.144 for COVID-19..

Aside from
WGR and waveguide-based sensors, other optical mechanisms have proved
effective as biosensing platforms. Raman spectroscopy is used to measure
molecular vibrations, utilizing the inelastic scattering and consequential
loss of energy of a visible or IR photon when it interacts with a
molecule. Surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) is a label-free
technique that uses the plasmonic resonant oscillation of surface
electrons in metallic nanostructures excited by the incident laser
beam. This increases the electric field intensity, thus enhancing
the intensity of the Raman spectrum of molecules adsorbed onto the
sensor surface.135 This technique has been
demonstrated many times for virus detection: Shanmukh et al.135 applied a variety of respiratory viruses to
a silver nanorod array, with a 785 nm near-IR laser used for measurements,
achieving LoD of 100 PFU/mL for respiratory syncytial virus. The relative
intensity of peaks in the SERS spectra enabled the differentiation
of influenza strains, with high reproducibility, and without the need
for receptors to provide specificity because specific Raman bands
arise from biomarkers such as nucleic acids and surface proteins that
can identify a virus.127,135.

More recently, SERS has
been applied to enhance the sensitivity of lateral flow immunoassays,
as can be seen in Figure 7, with the advantage of highly sensitive and real-time testing.
Simultaneous detection of influenza A H1N1 virus and human adenovirus
was achieved using a SERS-based LFIA, with magnetic SERS strips.127 Unlike traditional SERS, a solution containing
both viruses and their complementary antibodies conjugated to magnetic
Fe3O4@Ag nanoparticles was prepared, with a
magnet used to separate virions bound to their complementary antibodies
from the sample solution. Once the virus–antibody–nanoparticle
complexes were resuspended in 70 μL of running buffer, the enriched
solution flowed over strips of immobilized antibodies specific to
different viruses on the sensor. Viruses bound to their complementary
antibodies on the strip surface, and the interaction of molecular
bonds with IR light produced a SERS spectrum with intensity enhanced
by the presence of Fe3O4@Ag nanoparticles. Sensitivity
as low as 10 PFU/mL was recorded for human adenovirus, with simultaneous
detection and differentiation of multiple viruses possible.127 Moreover, a portable SERS multichannel LFIA
was also developed by Xiao et al.,145 with
a similar Au nanotag–antibody–antigen–antibody
sandwich utilized for SERS enhancement to detect three cancer markers
down to 0.01 ng/mL concentration. The portability and ease of operation
of this device opens avenues for its translation to POC testing.145 SERS has been proposed for use in PDMS-based
microfluidic devices that trap viruses, enabling rapid screening of
asymptomatic patients;146 hence, it has
huge potential in future diagnostics..

(a) Production method for Fe3O4@Ag magnetic
nanoparticles functionalized with antibodies and (b) diagram of the
Magnetic SERS LFIA with strips to detect H1N1 Influenza and Human
Adenovirus.127 A sample SERS spectrum is
shown, which would only occur upon viruses binding to complementary
immobilized antibodies. The spectrum intensity is proportional to
virus concentration, with large differences in Raman intensity between
strips with and without bound virus-antibody-nanoparticle complexes.
Reprinted with permission from ref (127). Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society..

A
variety of periodic
arrangements of dielectric materials at the nanoscale, called photonic
crystals (PhCs), have been successfully utilized for virus sensing.
One-dimensional PhC biosensors consist of periodic strips of dielectric
material, which reflect a narrow resonant wavelength band when illuminated
by a white light source, while other wavelengths pass through the
device. This wavelength corresponds to that at which standing waves
form in the device.125 Shafiee et al.125 utilized such a subwavelength grating coated
in TiO2 with immobilized anti-gp120 biotinylated antibodies
to capture HIV-1 in serum and PBS samples with concentration between
105 and 108 copies/mL. Each binding event resulted
in a resonant wavelength shift due to the virion altering the bulk
RI. Similarly, Pal et al.147 used a silicon
2D PhC coated with antibodies to detect human papillomavirus virus-like
particles in 10% fetal bovine serum, with LoD of 1.5 nM. Such 2D PhCs
have periodic variation in dielectric constant in 2D, so exhibit a
photonic band gap (PBG). By changing the size of a single hole in
the lattice, an optical cavity is created, with a resonant mode within
the PBG. When light from a tunable laser source of wavelength ∼
1.5 μm, at which silicon is transparent, illuminates the device,
a dip at the resonant wavelength is observed in the transmission spectrum
detected by a photodetector; this resonant wavelength shifts upon
virus binding. PhCs tend to have smaller mode volumes than WGRs such
as microspheres, making them more sensitive to environmental changes;
multiple PhCs in series can also be used for reference measurements
and multiple virus strain detection on a single device.147.

The devices in refs (125 and 147) rely on diffusion of viruses
to the sensor surface, which inherently increases measurement time;
however, examples of PhCs with integrated microfluidics have been
produced. Yanik et al.148 developed an
optofluidic nanoplasmonic biosensor, which detected viruses including
pseudotyped ebola using antibodies immobilized on a nanoplasmonic
array, with detection range of 106–109 PFU/mL. Plasmonic nanoholes couple normally incident light to oscillation
of surface plasmons at resonant wavelengths, and an effect known as
extraordinary light transmission results in increased transmission
of other wavelengths, minimizing noise. Complex optical setups to
couple light are not required due to the normal incidence of light.
As for other devices, binding of viruses alters local RI, providing
measurable red shifts in the resonant wavelength dip in the transmitted
light detected using a spectrometer.148.

The focus of this section is on direct
sensing; however, it is also possible to use imaging to detect viruses
and antibodies using techniques including fluorescence microscopy149 and single-particle interferometric imaging.150 Notably, a technique called plasmonic resonator
absorption microscopy has been proven for detection of human
IgG against SARS-CoV-2 with LoD of 100 pg/mL.151 A 1D PhC coated with TiO2 acts as a narrow bandwidth
resonant reflector at 625 nm when submerged in aqueous media. Formation
of a sandwich immunocomplex of COVID-19 IgG bound to antibodies immobilized
on an AuNP, with the COVID-19 IgG then binding to spike proteins immobilized
on the PhC surface, increases light absorption when the surface plasmon
resonant wavelength matched the PhC resonant wavelength. Reflected
resonant intensity decreases in the locality of the AuNP; therefore,
single particles can be observed and counted. Utilizing LED illumination
and a 2D image sensor allows for portability of the device.151 Such techniques for antibody detection will
become increasingly important for testing vaccination efficacy..

Electrical virus biosensors have demonstrated a number of important
advantages: direct instantaneous measurements of virus particles (in
real time or within minutes); high levels of sensitivity down to single
virus particles, i.e., using small amounts of analytes; chip-scale
sizes; and compatibility with CMOS technology of integrated circuits..

Mechanical sensors have several advantages over their electrical
counterparts; e.g., the authors of ref (124) claimed that sensitivity of such sensors approaches
the single-virion level, while the ability to detect particles spans
over 6 orders of magnitude. Also, they can be reusable if washed between
assays. However, the incubation time for the virus (herpes simplex)
was found to be 40 min, which is longer in comparison to measurements
taken with other sensor systems. In this regard, photonic and plasmonic
sensors represent the most powerful instrumentation with exceptional
characteristics: rapid real-time tests and highest sensitivity, down
to attomolar concentrations..

While all of these techniques provide
promise for more sensitive
and rapid detection methods in the future, they have not yet been
translated for SARS-CoV-2 detection specifically. An ever-increasing
number of papers are being published upon this however. In the next
subsection, we analyze several successful examples of bridging the
gap between sensors demonstrated to date and their applications in
SARS-CoV-2 sensing..

Last year, graphene for SARS-CoV-2
detection has been shown as
a promising material for sensor transducers. Graphene is a two-dimensional
sheet of hexagonally arranged carbon atoms. Graphene-based electrical
virus sensors have garnered great attention because graphene has exceptional
properties: high electric conductivity, high carrier mobility, and
large specific area. Thus, graphene could be an alternative, e.g.,
for silicon nanowire based field-effect transistors, providing a potentially
lower concentration response because the whole sheet of graphene is
a sensitive element. Graphene-based coronavirus detection was demonstrated
by Seo et al.119 They introduced a COVID-19
diagnostic method using graphene-based field-effect transistors (Figure 8) and demonstrated
the ability to make highly sensitive and instantaneous measurements
using small amounts of analyte of SARS-CoV-2 in cultured and clinical
samples..

Schematic diagram of COVID-19 field-effect transistor (FET) sensor
operation procedure. Graphene is a sensing material; SARS-CoV-2 spike
antibody is conjugated onto the graphene sheet via 1-pyrenebutyric
acid N-hydroxysuccinimide ester. Reprinted with permission
from ref (119). Copyright
2020 American Chemical Society..

The sensor was fabricated by coating the gate of the transistor
made from graphene sheets with antibodies that were immobilized using
1-pyrenebutyric acid N-hydroxysuccinimide ester (PBASE)
and that were specific against the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. For this,
graphene was transferred to a SiO2/Si substrate and soaked
in 2 mM PBASE in methanol and then rinsed several times with PBS and
deionized water. To immobilize the receptor, the device was exposed
to 250 μg/mL SARS-CoV-2 spike antibody. Virus infection experiments
were performed from African green monkey kidney Vero E6 cells infected
with a clinical isolate of SARS-CoV-2 and with clinical samples collected
via nasopharyngeal swabs from COVID-19 patients and healthy subjects.
All samples were inactivated by heating at 100 °C for 10 min
and were stored at −80 °C for further use. The inactivated
viral samples were applied to the graphene sensor’s surface.
The graphene sensor responded to virus concentrations as low as 16
pfu/mL, and the response was linear up to virus concentrations that
were 1000-fold larger. The same experiments were carried out using
clinical samples. Sensing signals were obtained using nasopharyngeal
swab specimens from COVID-19 patients, and the signals were clearly
differentiable from those obtained from control samples of noncovid
subjects. In addition, the sensor responded to patient samples diluted
to as much as 1:1 × 105 (242 virus copies/mL). Furthermore,
this sensor was specific and able to distinguish the SARS-CoV-2 antigen
protein from MERS-CoV..

A graphene-based multiplexed, portable,
wireless electrochemical
platform for ultrarapid detection of SARS-CoV-2 has been developed
in ref (152). The platform
uses capture antigens and antibodies immobilized on mass-producible,
low-cost graphene electrodes. This multiplexed platform tracks the
infection progression by diagnosing the stage of the disease, allowing
for the identification of individuals who are infectious, vulnerable,
and/or immune. Differential pulse voltammetry and open-circuit potential–electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy techniques have been employed to electrochemically
detect biomarker targets such as the viral antigen nucleocapsid protein
and IgM and IgG immunoglobins, as well as inflammatory biomarker c-reactive
protein (CRP) in blood and saliva samples from COVID-19 positive and
negative subjects..

A SARS-CoV-2 biosensor using graphene with
gold nanoparticles has
been developed by Alafeef et al.120 This
biosensor uses gold nanoparticles, capped with highly specific antisense
oligonucleotides (ssDNA) targeting the RNA of the viral nucleocapsid
phosphoprotein N-gene (Figure 9). The sensing probes were immobilized on a paper-based electrochemical
platform. The biosensor coupled with an electrical readout setup selectively
detected the presence of SARS-CoV-2 genetic material in Vero cells
and clinical samples. The specific RNA–DNA hybridization led
to a change in charge and electron mobility on the graphene surface,
which resulted in an instant change in sensor output voltage. The
thiol-modified ssDNA-capped gold nanoparticles improved the sensitivity
of the electrochemical assay. The sensor response has been validated
against RNA samples obtained from Vero cells infected with SARS-CoV-2,
while SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV RNA has been used as one of the negative
controls. This sensor also demonstrated good performance characteristics
such as less than 5 min incubation time, a sensitivity of 231 copies/μL,
LoD of 6.9 copies/μL, and almost 100% accuracy. Notably, the
sensor is less affected by the genomic mutations of the virus because
the ssDNA-conjugated gold nanoparticles simultaneously target two
separate regions of the SARS-CoV-2 RNA sequence..

Schematic representation
of the operation principle envisaged for
the COVID-19 electrochemical sensing platform assembled on paper using
graphene- and ssDNA-capped gold nanoparticles as the transducers,
wherein step A: the infected samples will be collected from the nasal
swab or saliva of the patients under observation; step B: the viral
SARS-CoV-2 RNA will be extracted; step C: the viral RNA will be added
on top of the graphene-ssDNA-AuNP platform; step D: incubation of
5 min; and step E: the digital electrochemical output will be recorded.
Reprinted with permission from ref (120). Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society..

One other design for an electrical biosensor for
COVID-19-related
viral testing is an array consisting of eight gold nanoparticles linked
to organic ligands.153 This was integrated
with electronic circuitry and an advanced apparatus that collects
a 2–3 s exhaled breath sample. As the breath passes through
the array of nanoparticles, a mixture of COVID-19-related volatile
organic compounds reacts with the sensor causing changes in the electrical
resistance. This produces a set of electrical resistance signals as
a function of time. We do not analyze this method in detail because
further validation studies, in differentiating patients with/without
COVID-19 and other lung infections, are needed..

Another technology
for SARS-CoV-2 detection, quartz crystal microbalances,
can be proposed and use the same principle of sensing as was described—the
sensor frequency can be changed under attachment of viral particles.
For this, the recognition layer should be prepared on the sensor surface.
A recent example of a proposal for implementation of engineered surfaces
for SARS-CoV-2 detection was described by Pandey.154 The author proposed self-assembled monolayers of hydrophobic
and negatively charged groups which were intended to provide specific
and strong interactions with spike proteins of coronavirus. On the
basis of the biophysical chemistry of the spike protein, mixed COOH
and CH3 groups appear to be the most appropriate for the
strong and specific attachment/binding of the spike S1 protein. To
improve the specificity, antibodies (antispike glycoprotein such as
immunoglobulin (Ig) and camelid heavy-chain antibody (VHH)) can be
immobilized on the modified surfaces..

Optical biosensors based
on surface plasmon resonance phenomenon
have been used to detect a variety of respiratory viruses including
SARS-CoV using genetic material as a biomarker.155 Crucially, Qiu et al.57 presented
a plasmonic photothermal (PPT) and localized surface plasmon resonance
(LSPR) biosensor shown in Figure 10a, capable of detecting SARS-CoV-2 nucleotide sequences
at concentrations of 0.22 pM. In addition to the enhanced sensing
capability enabled by LSPR discussed previously, PPT facilitates distinction
between two oligonucleotides differing by a few base pairs, enabling
distinction between selected SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 sequences. When
gold nanoislands functionalized with complementary nucleotides were
irradiated by a 532 nm laser, hot electrons were generated whose energy
dissipated rapidly as heat via the thermoplasmonic effect. Nucleic
acid strands have a melting temperature, Tm, at which the DNA hybridized strands dissociate. Strands that are
complementary have a higher Tm than those
which differ by a few base pairs. Thus, the temperature increase produced
by PPT means nucleotides with base pair sequence differing from the
receptor nucleotide refrained from binding.57 This provides the potential for use distinguishing the mutant SARS-CoV-2
strains already discussed. However, conventional SPR equipment can
be expensive and difficult to transport, making widespread POC use
difficult, although it still has potential for laboratory-based processing
of tests..

(a) Schematic of the LSPR and PPT biosensor. Gold nanoislands hybridized
with nucleotides are irradiated by two sources for thermoplasmonic
heating and plasmonic sensing, enabling detection of complementary
nucleotide binding. Reprinted with permission from ref (57). Copyright 2020 American
Chemical Society. (b) Nanoplasmonic sensing chip hybridized with SARS-CoV-2
monoclonal antibodies, to which a SARS-CoV-2 virion can bind, in itself
bound to ACE2 protein conjugated to AuNPs for plasmonic enhancement.
A cartridge containing such a chip for POC testing is shown, alongside
a graph of relative optical density change demonstrating the wide
range of concentrations this device can detect. Reprinted with permission
from ref (126). Copyright
2021 from Elsevier..

Another design, for
a nanoplasmonic biosensor chip, has been used
to detect SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus with concentration as low as 370
vp/mL (vp = virus particles)126 as shown
in Figure 10b. A silicon
plasmonic nanocup array chip coated with titanium and gold was produced,
with SARS-CoV-2 monoclonal antibodies immobilized on the surface.
AuNPs labeled with ACE2 protein were bound to SARS-CoV-2 virions,
which subsequently bound to immobilized antibodies on the chip. In
principle, the chip works as a label-free LSPR and photonic crystal
biosensor with extraordinary optical transmission providing high sensitivity
to local RI changes. Coupling between AuNPs and nanoplasmonic substrate
enabled low-concentration measurements with enhanced optical signal
intensity. A generic microplate reader at 640 nm wavelength was used
to detect the change in resonant wavelength with virus binding via
transmission measurements, as shown in Figure 10b. This makes for a far simpler design than
that of Qiu et al.57 Measurements could
be taken in 15 min and processed using a smart phone connected to
a POC device, providing easily transportable, low-cost, rapid detection
which could be advantageous in resource-limited environments.126 Moreover, Yoo et al.156 recently produced a reusable SPR biosensor chip, which uses magnetic
particles as a solid substrate for SPR. Once a sensing measurement
is complete, a magnet removes these particles. This enables the device
to be reused, with H1N1 influenza virus nucleoprotein detected more
than 7 times without significant changes in signal. Such a technique
has the potential to reduce the cost of SPR technology,156 allowing widespread use in clinical settings..

The first steps toward devices for SARS-CoV-2 new generation sensing
have already been taken. One example of biosensor hardware has been
described by Xian et al.118 They proposed
a low-cost COVID-19 electrochemical sensor based on a Si metal-oxide-silicon
field-effect transistor (MOSFET). As an example, the authors report
detection of 100 fg/mL (7 fM) SARS-CoV-2 spike protein in saliva.
They have succeeded in making use of a disposable sensor fabricated
in-house for COVID-19 detection alongside a Si MOSFET-based sensor
unit. Notably, electrochemical sensors exploiting potentiometry, voltammetry,
coulometry, and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy have great
potential for coronavirus detection via coronavirus-related proteins
and detection of viral DNA.157.

In the clinic, the standard assay used to identify an active infection
of SARS-CoV-2 is a quantitative RT-PCR test. qRT-PCR LoD ranges between
60 and 300 viral copies/mL. qRT-PCR sensitivity is adequate for detecting
most cases when the patient is infectious to others where one encounters
a median viral load of 8  ×  104 copies/mL.
However, qRT-PCR tests encounter a window of false negatives early
in the infection cycle when the viral load is low, and also later
in the infection cycle when the virus may no longer persist in the
upper airway. Overall, the success of a qRT-PCR test in detecting
a positive SARS-CoV-2 case in the clinic is about 60%, leading to
repeat testing to confirm cases if clinical suspicion for disease
is high..

qRT-PCR false positives are often seen in patients
who continue
to shed viral RNA although viable viral particles cannot be cultured.
Viral shedding usually occurs after COVID symptom onset with the obvious
exception of asymptomatic patients. It is normal for this to occur
for a mean of 17 days after infection, but continues in some patients
for several weeks. This can cause confusion as one obtains technically
“correct” positive test results, but these patients
do not need to be isolated.13 False negatives—anecdotally
repeating three or four qRT-PCR tests in cases where clinical suspicion
was high for a positive result—were not uncommon during the
initial outbreak. These appear less common now as staff perhaps became
more familiar with sampling, qRT-PCR tests improved by using multiple
primers, and so on and our understanding of the time course of viral
shedding has progressed. Evidence published early in the COVID-19
pandemic seems to support this with 30–60% positive results
from RT-PCR in patients with suspected COVID-19. qRT-PCR seems to
offer the most flexible testing platform that could adapt to mutant
strains—although adaptable over weeks/months time frame—otherwise
whole gene sequencing is required..

Molecular sensor tests identifying
viable viral particles could
overcome the problem of persistent positive results. Also, sensors
could offer the multiplexed detection of mutants or one could offer
specialized kits/sensors devices for each mutant. SPR and PPT devices57 that detect specified nucleotide sequences using
nucleotide hybridization have the potential for mutant strain detection
focused on certain nucleotide sequences. However, SPR devices will
most likely be used in a laboratory environment, rather than POC application.
In future, if different treatments or differences in prognosis become
apparent between mutant strains, a testing platform to differentiate
and quantify the presence of viral strains in real time would be an
invaluable clinical tool. High sensitivities for the detection of
viral particles were already demonstrated with photonic devices, down
to 10s–100s PFU/mL.126,127.

A qRT-PCR replacement
sensor test would need to offer faster turnaround
times to enable the more rapid and repetitive testing that will be
needed. Less invasive sampling by using saliva or even breath samples
instead of the nasopharyngeal swab, which is uncomfortable, could
improve sensor test uptake in and outside the clinic. Rapid sensor
tests should ideally match or exceed the current LoD of qRT-PCR to
enable the early detection of infection and the detection of infection
in prolonged and asymptomatic cases. A number of photonic devices
show promise for achieving this. They are potential candidates for
replacing laboratory qRT-PCR tests, especially at the point of care;
see Table 2. Already,
optical sensor devices can provide extremely low limits of detection
(nanoplasmonic devices achieve 370 particles/mL; graphene-based devices
achieve 242 virus copies/mL), fast run time (many photonic-based sensors
operate within 15–30 min on site), and a high dynamic range
of detection (aM to μM). Plasmonic devices seem most promising
for achieving high portability. The nanoplasmonic biosensor chip126 requires only a point-of-care microplate reader
and a smart phone to perform testing..

Lateral flow viral antigen
tests currently lack diagnostic accuracy
to be a single test in a diagnostic pathway. Lateral flow serology
tests have only limited clinical value because they identify cases
only after risk of infectious transmission. The result of these tests
is highly dependent on the developed immunity and the length of the
immune response. The often high rate of false positive (and negative)
test results needs to be addressed. Laboratory-based serological tests
have similar issues to lateral flow tests, but improved diagnostic
accuracy, and there is supporting evidence that they have benefits
in public health.158.

Developing novel
sensor-based lateral flow test devices to check
the effectiveness of vaccines could become extremely useful. However,
more evidence is needed that such tests can identify spike protein
antibodies which seem to correlate best with viral neutralizing studies.
Here, more clarity is needed from the manufacturers of the lateral
flow tests on validation data. Lateral flow tests and other POC tests
can have a rapid turnaround and would be ideal antigen tests. Most
lateral flow tests have a lower sensitivity, suggesting that improvement
on the scale of orders of magnitude in LoD is needed for many of the
devices to become deployed in the clinic. The currently high LoD together
with a limited specificity of these tests means that they are not
yet fit for this purpose..

Other sensor techniques that directly
detect virus particles could
become important. Already, SERS lateral flow immunoassay with magnetic
nanoparticles have demonstrated LoDs of 50 and 10 PFU/mL for influenza
and adenovirus, respectively.127 The intensity
of the output spectrum is proportional to viral load, so identification
of early stage infection may be possible. These sensors could be used
to identify positive cases in the incubation period and could open
potential for even more successful treatment pathways. The sensors
would allow drugs preventing viral entry into cells to become of use
at the early stage of the infection in a way similar to postexposure
prophylaxis in HIV infection..

Private healthcare companies are
charging £65 for an antibody
test and £125 for a qRT-PCR test. The cost of a lateral flow
antibody test is approximately $5 USD (e.g., BinaxNOW COVID-19 Ag
Card). Ideally, to ensure future ASSURED sensing throughout the world,
we need more affordable tests, with the potential for free tests to
be made available in third world countries. Sensor approaches such
as reusable SPR chip156 with magnetic nanoparticles
that can be removed after each measurement could help reduce the cost
of using SPR for POC, with chips useable for different target viruses.
Fortunately, antibodies are robust, can be stored at 2–30 °C,
and are stable for use at room temperature 15–30 °C, so
portability of sensors can be high..

A key challenge in developing
in vitro novel diagnostics tests,
especially at POC, is adoption of the technologies by stakeholders
such as the National Health Service (NHS) in the U.K. or by the Food
and Drug Administration in the USA. For U.K. adoption, the Medicines
and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency and the National Institute
for Health and Care Excellence must be informed of the technologies,
with the aim of the in vitro diagnostic device (IVD) being externally
validated to determine whether it meets appropriate sensitivity and
specificity. This includes meeting the minimum requirements of the
positive predictive value—an essential measurement of diagnostic
capability and negative predictive value tested against an appropriate
patient population to achieve regulatory conformity and expedite NHS
adoption of the technology. The time taken for IVD adoption within
the NHS has been approximately 10 years (https://www.bivda.org.uk/)..

For the CE Marking to Directive 98/79/EC on in vitro diagnostic
medical devices, contact with the MHRA is required for the Registration
of the Device and accessories and then to move toward adoption via
the Health Technologies Adoption Programme (HTAP), now coordinated
by NICE. Assessing the Technology Readiness levels (TRL) of the IVD
from 1 to 9 is of importance throughout before use in clinical practice
and commercial translation, which also requires commercial partners
and a business plan for implementation. Significant funding is also
required to achieve commercial translation in order to reach TRL9..

Clinical necessity has driven rapid development of diagnostic testing
for SARS-CoV-2. However, what we have seen has been rapid upscaling
and adaptation of existing technologies rather than a diagnostic revolution.
It is understandable that with timelines in adopting novel diagnostic
technologies historically averaging 10 years, research and development
funding has focused on established diagnostics rather than novel sensor
technologies..

There is much optimism but uncertainty as to the
impact of vaccination
programs on the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. Further outbreaks and possible
seasonal waves are anticipated, and as such there may be an ongoing
need and sufficient time for sensor diagnostics to develop to be ready
to be integrated into clinical testing pathways. However, after the
initial surge to establish testing pathways and investment in infrastructure,
we may see a fatigue and inertia to innovation with the status quo
viewed as adequate. Indeed existing RT-PCR techniques sets a high
bar to overcome with high diagnostic accuracy, increasingly rapid
turnaround times, scalability, falling costs, and detection at low
viral loads. Sensor diagnostics will need to offer a paradigm shift
or fulfill a critical niche to supplant molecular or immunoassay testing.
Examples of such niches are in patients with suspected false positive
RT-PCR tests during their convalescence; rapid testing for mass screening,
e.g., crowds; testing using less invasive specimens; and to identify
patients with or at risk of persistent COVID-19 symptoms (“post-COVID-syndrome”).
Further enhancing the uptake of sensor-based COVID-19 screening methods
may require the introduction of assays that are higher-throughput,
especially when compared to RT-PCR. A typical strategy here is to
adapt fabrication methods for sensors in array format and finding
ways for integrating them with suitable high-throughput microfluidics..

⊥ N.T., E.O., L.T.J., and J.D. contributed equally to this work..

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest..

an analytical device, used
for the detection of a biological/chemical substance that combines
a biological component (receptor) with a physicochemical transducer.

the family
of viruses that can cause illness in humans and animals, seven different
types having been found to infect people, including SARS-CoV-2 responsible
for the COVID-19 pandemic.

the contagious disease caused by SARS-CoV-2.

one of the
tools that can be used to support the diagnosis of COVID-19, the LFD
detects a COVID-19 antigen that appears in the sample of a person
that is or was infected with SARS-CoV-2.

the polymerase chain reaction used to rapidly
synthesize copies of a specific DNA, allowing one to take a sample
composed of few DNA molecules and amplify a specific DNA sequence.

the severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2.

