Public Health interventions have succeeded marginally to flatten the COVID-19 epidemic curve of the most recent wave in many regions. Several highly transmissible COVID-19 Variants of Concern (VOCs) have emerged internationally, with variable virulence and as-yet unclear antigenicity. Growing public fatigue highlights the importance of accurately quantifying the speed at which VOCs can replace the resident strain, to inform precise decision-making in terms of both timing and scale of interventions..

Using a simple Susceptible-Infected-Removed (SIR) model, we derive a formula calculating the duration for a VOC to increase its frequency from one level to another. We evaluate the impact of interventions on VOC-related variables..

After introduction of a VOC with a higher transmissibility than the resident strain, its prevalence increases exponentially, leading to eventual replacement by the VOC. Even if the outbreak caused by the resident strain has previously been brought under control, the epidemic is eventually going to increase exponentially, possibly after a transient declining phase. The initial VOC frequency, epidemic mean generation time, and reproduction number of the resident strain all contribute to determining the speed of VOC replacement and the resulting epidemic growth..

Following the introduction of a VOC, the risk of a sudden surge of the total cases is hidden behind a transient decline. Maintaining or enhancing Public Health interventions are vital to slowing down the VOC replacement, curbing the epidemic growth, and increasing VOC doubling time..

The Canadian Institute of Health Research (CIHR) 2019 Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) rapid research program..

The novel “Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS)-related Coronavirus type 2” (SARS-CoV-2) is an emerging coronavirus responsible for the ongoing pandemic of “Coronavirus disease 2019” (COVID-19). The disease is generally mild but can sometimes be severe and even fatal. Many countries have experienced multiple outbreaks, and have been struggling to strike a balance between controlling an outbreak and maintaining essential social-economic activity by escalating social distancing measures despite public fatigue. The first COVID-19 pandemic year ended with mixed news of the approval of vaccines and the emergence of variants with higher transmissibility, so an intense race between vaccine rollout and variants introduction and establishment slowdown started early in 2021. Winning this race requires precision in decision making as little room and limited resources are left to improve available public health interventions..

Like other emerging viruses causing a global pandemic, the original resident wild strain of SARS-CoV-2 has mutated many times since its initial human clinical emergence in late December 2019, in Wuhan, mainland China. Mutations can arise spontaneously as a consequence of a series of macro- and micro-evolution processes as well as a consequence of selection pressures [1–3]. Based on its genomic profile, SARS-CoV-2 can be subdivided into various genetic groups, and identifying specific mutations enables researchers to distinguish between viral groups circulating worldwide. However, some of these mutations (termed as “variants of concern”, VOCs) may be meaningful from a clinical public health perspective, with higher transmissibility, virulence, and mortality [3]..

Some VOCs have been reported by national public health authorities to the World Health Organization (WHO), including VOC-202012/01 (also known as lineage B.1.1.7, commonly referred to as the “UK variant” or the “British variant”) [4,5], 20I/501Y.V2 (known as lineage B.1.351, commonly termed as the “South African variant”) [6,7] and lineage B.1.1.28 (known as the “Brazilian variant”) [8,9]. The UK variant was announced on December 14, 2020, and is characterized by 23 nucleotide substitutions and appears to confer an increased risk of virulence and mortality [4–9]. As of January 19, 2021, this VOC has spread outside of the UK and has been imported to at least 60 countries and territories [3]. The South African variant was reported to the WHO on December 18, 2020, and, as of January 19, 2021, has been identified in 23 countries beyond South Africa [3]. The Brazilian variant was announced on March 5, 2020, and is currently circulating in the UK, USA, Canada, Portugal and Australia [3]. Other variants are under study and strict monitoring from international public health authorities, including the “Japanese variant” (variant P.1, lineage B.1.1.28, notified on January 9, 2021) and the “USA variant” (L452R, detected in some counties of the state of California, USA) [3]..

Once introduced in the population, a more transmissible variant will become more and more prevalent, eventually replacing the original resident strain. From the point of view of the epidemic, the effect of the higher transmissibility of the new variant may be negligible at first, but may translate in a dramatic acceleration of new cases. Understanding the timing and trajectory of a VOC in becoming potentially dominant is vital to planning appropriate clinical public health measures for containment, control and mitigation, and to optimizing public communications. Using a mathematical model, we characterise analytically the time necessary for a VOC to reach a certain frequency in the population, given its transmissibility, reproduction number and growth rate, relative to the original resident strain. Finally, we describe the overall prevalence resulting from the co-circulation of the two strains. Our results illustrate that targeted and appropriately sequenced public health interventions are essential to delay the replacement of the resident strain by more transmissible VOCs, and to prevent the dramatic consequences of an increased epidemic growth rate caused by the more transmissible VOCs..

We consider a generic setting where a new variant is introduced in a community in which a resident, predominant strain of the pathogen is causing an infectious disease outbreak. This framework is transferable to many jurisdictions in different stages of the COVID-19 epidemic and subject to the introduction and diffusion of different VOCs..

We formulated a simple Susceptible-Infected-Removed (SIR) model in which susceptible individuals can be infected by each strain, but no co-infection can happen, and where, after recovery, individuals gain immunity against both strains. We assumed that both strains have different transmissibility but equal mean generation time, which, in our model, coincides with the time between an infected individual becoming infectious and being removed from the transmission chain. Before herd immunity is established in the population, we can assume that almost all individuals are susceptible. Under this assumption, we obtained closed formulas for: the evolution of the frequency of the VOC in time, the time necessary for the VOC to become dominant in the population (time to replacement), and the overall growth rate (or, equivalently, the doubling time) of the epidemic. These aspects depend on several factors, including the relative transmissibility of the VOC with respect to the resident strain, the initial frequency of the new VOC in the population, and the control reproduction number of the resident strain. The complete mathematical derivations are included in the Supplementary Material..

We used simulated scenarios that demonstrate that public health interventions have a twofold effect by delaying the establishment of the variant in the population and reducing the speed of epidemic growth. In particular, we used exponential projections by fixing the mean generation time and the reproduction number of the resident strain. We assumed that the outbreak caused by the resident strain is under control when physical distancing measures are in place (assumed control reproduction number Rw
 = 0.8), and is increasing when measures are lifted (assumed control reproduction number Rw
 = 1.1). As we aim to propose a procedure that can be applied to reported cases data, we assumed a 7-day delay between the relaxation of interventions and a visible change in the observed case growth rate. For an illustration, we assumed a mean generation time of 5-, 6- and 7-days. Several scenarios were projected by assuming that the interventions are relaxed after 15 or 30 days from the initial time, when an initial number of 1000 confirmed cases is assumed. We assumed an initial relative prevalence of 1% of the new variant relative to the resident strain, and a relative transmissibility ranging from 140% to 160%, consistent with recent estimates for VOC-202012/01 [11–13]..

We demonstrate our findings using a common public health setting, where the population has gone through multiple outbreaks through a series of escalating public health interventions, leading to full lockdown that was effective in controlling the latest outbreak of the current, resident strain: that is, we assume a control reproduction number Rw
 < 1. Public fatigue and essential social-economic activity combined, however, constrain the lower boundary of the control reproduction number so that further reduction can hardly be achieved. We use Rw
 = 0.8 as an illustration. With this assumption on the reproduction number for the resident strain, an increase of the transmissibility by at least 125% by the VOC will lead to the control reproduction number exceeding the threshold one, so the number of confirmed cases with the VOC will increase exponentially..

In the aforementioned setting, the total reported cases are given by the sum of the cases of infection with the resident strain (described by an exponentially declining function) and the cases of infection with the VOC (described by an exponentially increasing function). With an initial low frequency of the VOC, the total number of cases initially declines, despite the infection by the VOC increasing exponentially. The risk of a sudden surge of the total cases is hidden behind this transient decline. The decline gradually slows down to a point when the epidemic has a drastic change even if all social distancing measures remain. Figure 1 presents a simulation based on the assumptions that social distancing measures remain in place (Rw
 = 0.8), assuming the initial ratio between VOC and resident strain is 1%. The simulation highlights the initial transient decline in reported cases and the subsequent resurgence of the infection with exponential growth. This resurgence is caused by the underlying increase of the relative frequency of the VOC in the population, represented by the red sigmoidal function in Figure 1..

A major contributor to the change of the epidemic trend is the insufficiency of public health measures to reduce the control reproduction number of the VOC below 1. Assuming 150% relative transmissibility of the VOC compared to the resident strain, this would be equivalent to reducing the control reproduction number of the resident strain to a level of 1/1.5 ≈ 0.67. Figure 2(a) shows the time to replacement as a function of the assumed mean generation time, for an initial ratio between strains of 1%. The time to replacement is 57, 69 and 80 days, assuming the time from being infectious to being removed from the transmission chain is 5, 6, and 7 days respectively. Therefore, reducing the time from being infectious to being removed by two days can save 23 days of the VOC replacement time. This demonstrates the significant role of rapid testing and follow-up case management in slowing down the VOC dominance. Similarly, with a 7-day period from infection to removal, increasing Rw
 from 0.8 to 1.1 will lead to a decrease by 80 – 58 = 22 days for the time of variant replacement. In other words, a reduction of 0.3/1.1=27% of transmission effective contacts can buy the community an additional three-week period avoiding the VOC replacement..


Figure 2(b) shows the doubling time as a function of the initial ratio of the cases with the VOC versus the cases with the resident strain. Note that, if Rw
 = 1.1 (red curve), the doubling time for the cases of the resident strain alone is 48 days, and this declines drastically even with a very small portion of VOC case importation, becoming shorter than 12 days when the VOC takes over the resident strain. The decline becomes less and less significant when the initial ratio exceeds 20%, therefore prompt travel restriction to minimize VOC importation at the very early stage is critical for slowing down the pace towards replacement of the resident strain with the VOC. The requirement for travel restriction and border screening becomes less significant when community interventions are effective to render the control reproduction number below the threshold (Rw
 = 0.8), as shown in the blue curve of Figure 2(b). However, the VOC can still lead to a dramatic change in the epidemic trend as it can turn a declining epidemic into a significant outbreak: note that, in the case where the epidemic with the resident strain is under control (Rw
 < 1), the total cases continue to decline in the absence of a VOC, so that “halving time” rather than “doubling time” is relevant (the halving time being represented in Figure 3(a) by the absolute value of the negative doubling time). Despite the decline in cases with the resident strain, the total cases of infection will eventually increase as long as the newly imported VOC has a reproduction number larger than 1. Figure 3 shows the variation of the doubling time as a function of the doubling time of the resident strain, under different assumptions about the time between being infectious and being removed (Figure 3(a)) or about the initial ratio between the VOC and the resident strain (Figure 3(b))..

Awareness of the time to replacement and the speed of the epidemic in the presence of a more transmissible strain is fundamental to planning vaccine rollout interventions. In this context, scenario projections allow us to investigate the effect of an increased speed of transmission, and to avoid severe consequences like overwhelming the hospital system due to lifting public health measures too quickly. Starting from a situation where a full lockdown is implemented and the VOC still has a negligible prevalence in the population (Rw
 = 0.8), Figure 5 illustrates three projections of reported infection cases for 75 days ahead, according to three different intervention plans: lockdown is never lifted (low projection, blue); lockdown is lifted after 30 days (medium projection, yellow); lockdown is lifted after 15 days (high projection, red). After lockdown is lifted, in all projections we assumed that the control reproduction number of the epidemic with the resident strain returns to Rw
 = 1.1. Notably, by comparing the projections without (upper panel) and with (lower panel) the newly imported VOC, Figure 5 highlights the dramatic effect of the VOC for the purposes of epidemic control and the sustainability of the epidemic from the public health point of view. Figure 4 shows the same projections in terms of the relative frequency of the VOC, confirming once more the importance of public health interventions for delaying the VOC becoming predominant in the community..

Using SIR modelling and simulations, we found that with the introduction of a VOC, an initial decline of cases is followed by exponential growth: the risk of a sudden surge of the total cases is hidden behind this transient decline. This is due to the take-over phenomenon where the frequency of VOC transmission increases over time in the population. While public health interventions like hand-washing, masks, physical distancing, and limitations on large gatherings should remain effective, control of a more transmissible variant would likely require more stringent application and widespread adoption of these measures..

As such, social distancing measures are fundamental to 1) slowing down the replacement process by the VOC, and 2) curbing/delaying the growth of the epidemic and increasing its doubling time..

Apparently minor variations or errors in decision making can have profound impacts on epidemic containment, control and mitigation. There are very narrow time scales to a new outbreak due to VOCs, and for effective vaccine rollout. Any public health intervention improvement that can lead to extending the replacement time by a few weeks may mean reduced demand on health care and their hospital systems, and thousands of infections and associated short and long term morbidity avoided, and many lives saved..

Given that SARS-CoV-2 mutations and their VOC are continuously emergent, it is of paramount importance to devise a mathematical model that accounts for VOCs and that enables real-time quantification of the potential impacts of VOCs on epidemic trends, and the impact or requirement for additional public health measures. This quantification in general and the accuracy of a predictive scenario in particular, are essential at this stage of the COVID-19 global pandemic, as available resources and social tolerance to further strict public health interventions are very limited..

Some mathematical models and analyses focused on COVID-19 VOCs have emerged. These models have computed the higher risk conferred by the variants [3–9], as well as the risk of importing these VOCs through international travel [10]. In particular, Davies and colleagues [11] have found that the B117 variant is approximately 56% more transmissible (95% credible interval ranging from 50 to 74%) than the previously circulating variants of SARS-CoV-2, and as such recommended that British authorities implement a more stringent package of public health interventions, including closing schools and universities. In terms of clinical public health impacts, the B117 variant is already posing a significant strain on UK healthcare systems, resulting in increased COVID-19 related hospitalizations and deaths. Similarly, Vöhringer and coauthors [12] estimated a reproduction number for the “UK variant” about 1.47-fold higher (95% CI ranging from 1.41 to 1.53) than that of other circulating lineages. Volz and coworkers [13] combined genomic and epidemiological data to obtain a broader picture of the SARS-CoV-2 lineage B.1.1.7 variant. They were able to find that where, on the one hand, the VOC had significantly higher transmissibility than non-VOC lineages with a marked transmission advantage, on the other hand, it had a different latent period or generation time and a clinical-epidemiological behavior, mostly affecting the younger population. Computed differences in reproduction numbers between VOC and non-VOC lineages went from 0.4 to 0.7, with a reproduction number ratio in the range 1.4-1.8..

Our results are in line with these reports, warranting the urgent need for evaluating the implementation of stricter public health interventions, given the increased transmissibility and virulence of some VOCs [14]. Since vaccine deployment is likely to take several months before the achievement of herd immunity, immediate steps should be taken to reduce the number of new cases and thus the number of hospitalizations and deaths, and to prevent the insurgence of more virulent strains of SARS-CoV-2 [14]..

Vaccination strategies can be incorporated into our model and analysis to consider the effects of different vaccines against resident and VOC strains. With data on coverage, vaccine antigenicity and effectiveness against transmission, and timing and staging of different vaccines in a population, we could replace the assumed constant 1 approximating the ratio of the susceptible population to the entire population (no depletion of susceptibles assumption) by a corresponding ratio of the population susceptible to a particular VOC strain. This will impact the control reproduction numbers of both resident and VOC strains. Our quantified dependence of VOC frequency on the control reproduction number of the resident strain (and the relative transmissibility of both) can then be expanded to the dependence of reproduction numbers of both resident and VOC strains that are impacted by vaccine coverages, timings and characteristics..

This will impact on the control reproduction numbers of both the resident strain and the VOC. Our quantified dependence of the VOC frequency on the control reproduction number of the resident strain and the relative transmissibility can then be expanded to the dependence on the reproduction numbers of both strains, impacted by the coverages, timing and characteristics against different strains of vaccines..

Our findings have practical implications for COVID-19 related public health policies, and equip policy and decision-makers with an enabling tool to project the timing of VOC take-over, the impacts of modulating the strength of public health interventions implemented, and for aiding in deciding whether to relax or enhance public health interventions..

Due to the insurgence of new VOCs, it is absolutely mandatory not to ease the public health control measures implemented, and is extremely crucial to accelerate vaccine roll-out to mitigate against the clinical public health burden imposed by COVID-19..

Hidden surge of infection by the variant. We assumed initially 1000 cases, with 1% ratio between the new variant and the resident strain, a control reproduction number of Rw
 = 0.8 for the resident strain, 150% transmissibility, and 7-day mean generation time..

Left: Time to replacement as a function of the assumed mean generation time, with initial 1% ratio between the new variant and the resident strain. Right: Time to double the number of cases as a function of the assumed initial ratio between variant and resident strain, for a mean generation time of 7 days. We show the results for the assumed reproduction number in the presence of interventions (Rw
 = 0.8) and in their absence (Rw
 = 1.1)..

Total doubling time (of the epidemic with the two strains together) as a function of the doubling time of the resident strain. Left: starting from an initial ratio of new variant over the resident strain of 10%, and varying the mean generation time (5, 6, 7 days). Right: for fixed 7-day mean generation time and varying the initial ratio of the new variant over the resident strain (3%, 5%, 10%)..

Time evolution of the relative frequency of the new variant over the resident strain, for three projection scenarios (low: no relaxation of interventions; medium: relaxation after 30 days; high: relaxation after 15 days). We assumed a mean generation time of 7 days, 1000 initially infected individuals and initial ratio of the new variant over the resident strain of 1%..

Projections of the total number of confirmed cases in three scenarios (low: no relaxation of interventions; medium: relaxation after 30 days; high: relaxation after 15 days), without (upper panel) or with (lower panel) introduction of the new variant. We assumed 7-day mean generation time, 1000 initial infected cases with a ratio of 1% between the new variant and the resident strain. The solid lines in the lower panel are obtained assuming a relative transmissibility of 150%, and the shaded areas show the projection using a relative transmissibility in the interval (140%, 160%)..

